Title: 2606.11869v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.11869v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 00:49:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 43

Markdown Content:
Agents All the Way Down 

# A Methodology for Building Custom AI Agents from Substrate to Pro 

# duction 

Marc Alier Forment¹, Juanan Pereira², Francisco José García-Peñalvo³, María José Casañ 

Guerrero¹ 

¹ Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona, Spain ² Universidad del País 

Vasco / Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea (UPV/EHU), Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain ³ Uni -

versidad de Salamanca (USAL), Salamanca, Spain 

> marc.alier@upc.edu

# Abstract 

Thousands of software engineers are building or about to build  custom AI agents  —

agents that live inside their own application, talk to their own data and tools, enforce 

their own security boundaries, and carry their own brand and audit trail. What separates 

custom agents from the general-purpose tier (Claude Code, Cursor, and the like) is  fit , not 

capability: each is built for one job, by the engineer who will maintain it. No published 

practice, though, sets out how to build one end to end. The pieces are everywhere: 

function-calling APIs, the Model Context Protocol, general-purpose code agents to pair 

with. The practice that chains them together is not — it lives in podcasts, blog posts, and 

leaked system prompts. This paper writes that practice down as a methodology,  Agents 

All the Way Down , with a defining shape: two preconditions the engineer crosses once and 

keeps, then three practices the engineer repeats for the life of the agent. The preconditions 

are  (P1) Substrate  — treating the large language model (LLM) as a software component, 

framed as  tools → system → messages  under today’s prompt-caching schemes — and 

(P2) Building blocks  — function calling, the Model Context Protocol (MCP), command-

line interface (CLI) orchestration, the  liteshell  pattern, the agent loop, skills, characters, 

hooks, and scaffolding. The three repeated practices are  (P3)  prototype with a general-

purpose agent;  (P4)  harvest, fold, and ship the result as a CLI — the  Turtle pattern ; and 

(P5)  agent-tests-agent, in which a general-purpose agent drives the custom agent through 

behavioural scenarios. P5 complements classical software testing; it does not replace it. 

Once the preconditions are in hand, the engineer’s working life is the loop P3  → P4  →

P5  → P3 — and that loop is where the title lives. One corollary falls out for free: multi-

agent orchestration is just CLI composition. We build the methodology framework-free, 

for engineering reasons rather than pedagogical ones (§7.1). It was distilled from the AAC 

(Agent-Assisted Creator), a custom agent for the open-source LAMB (Learning Assistants 

Manager and Builder) educational platform: built in about ten days by one developer with 

an AI pair-programmer, in production at two universities (~200 educator-creators) since 

1April 2026, and since carried to other LAMB subprojects. We present it as a transferable 

practice, independent of any language or framework. 

Keywords:  Large language models · AI agents · Agent engineering · Software engineering 

methodology · LLM tooling · Agent-tests-agent · Multi-agent orchestration · Supply-chain 

security 

# 1. Introduction 

1.1 What is a custom AI agent? 

A custom AI agent  is a piece of software that decides, on each turn, which tool to call 

next, with the help of a large language model. It is not a chatbot or a generic copilot: it is 

purpose-built — for one application, one domain, one set of users — by the engineer who 

will maintain it. 

The general-purpose code-agent tier — Claude Code [Anthropic 2026a], OpenCode 

[Anomaly 2026], Cursor [Cursor 2026], Aider [Gauthier 2026] — has become extraordinary 

engineering. Those are the  carpenter’s bench saw : powerful, broadly useful, deliberately 

general. The custom agent is the  cabinet maker’s jig : built for one specific job, by/for the 

cabinet maker, fitted to one piece of work. The distinction this paper concerns itself with 

is fit, not capability. 

What makes an agent custom? Six axes: 

1.  Domain knowledge embedded in the system prompt and skills  — the agent knows 

the engineer’s codebase, conventions, vocabulary, and data shape as durable cached 

system content, not as conversational re-priming each session. 

2.  Tools the general agent does not have  — internal APIs, private CLIs, line-of-business 

data sources. The agent operates on the engineer’s  application’s  surface rather than the 

host filesystem and shell. 

3.  Deployment inside the engineer’s own application  — the agent runs inside the 

FastAPI route, the Spring Boot service, the educational platform, the e-commerce 

backend. The user never sees a terminal; they see the product, with an agent in it. 

4.  Security boundaries the engineer controls  — an allow-list fitted to the job; the agent 

cannot do what it does not need to do. 

5.  Cost predictability through right  sized model choice  — small specialised model for 

the classifier, frontier model for the planner, local model for high-volume mechanical 

work. The cost curve is the engineer’s to shape. 

6.  Brand, voice, audit trail, and compliance posture  — the agent talks to  the engineer’s 

users in  the engineer’s  voice; it logs to  the engineer’s  audit pipeline; it complies with  the 

engineer’s  regulatory boundaries. 

An agent that needs at least one of those is a candidate for the custom build. An agent that 

needs none of them should not be built — the general-purpose tier handles it. 

21.2 Why build one? 

The engineer builds a custom agent when one or more of the six axes prevents the general-

purpose agent from doing the job cleanly. Four concrete shapes of problem recur: 

• An assistant inside an educational platform  — the AAC (Agent-Assisted Creator) 

studied as a worked example in §6. Educators are not engineers; the agent must speak 

the language of pedagogy, not of code; it must operate the platform’s surface, not the 

host’s shell; it must run inside the platform’s backend, not in a terminal. 

• A continuous  integration / continuous  deployment (CI/CD) helper  that knows the 

team’s deployment topology, runbook conventions, and incident history. The general 

agent knows generic CI; the custom agent knows the team’s. 

• A customer  service agent  that operates on the customer’s own state. The general agent 

cannot resolve the customer record; the custom agent’s first tool does. 

• A data  extraction pipeline agent  that handles documents of a shape the business sees 

a thousand times a day. The general agent can do one document well; the custom agent 

does the thousand reliably, at the right cost, inside the engineer’s product. 

The general-purpose agent can do any of these once; the custom agent does them reliably, 

at predictable cost, inside the engineer’s application.  A custom agent is what the engineer 

builds when the general agent ends and the problem keeps going. 

1.3 How does the engineer build one? 

The question, then, is:  what is the practice for building such a thing?  In 2026 the toolbox 

is extraordinary — function-calling APIs across every major LLM provider, the Model 

Context Protocol [Anthropic 2024b; MCP 2025] for tool exposure, mature general-purpose 

code agents usable as pair-programmers, dozens of agent frameworks. But the  practice  of 

building a custom agent has remained largely tacit. It lives in podcast interviews with 

framework creators, in leaked codebases — such as the Claude Code system-prompt leak 

of April 2026 — in GitHub READMEs that show what to do but not why, and in conference 

talks that present finished products without the path that produced them.  The ingredients 

have been catalogued; the recipe has not. 

This paper proposes one we have tested. The methodology has  five phases , with an organ -

ising asymmetry that shapes the rest of the paper:  the first two phases are preconditions 

the engineer crosses once and keeps; the last three are the practice the engineer iterates 

indefinitely  (see §3 for the full presentation and §4 for why the practice is structurally a 

cycle). 

• P1 — Substrate.  Internalise the LLM as a software component: the structural framing 

(tools → system → messages ) under current provider prompt-caching schemes, the four 

practical constraints (cost, hallucination, context, time), and the cache discipline that 

follows from them. 

• P2 — Building blocks.  Vocabulary fluency: function calling, MCP versus CLI versus 

the liteshell pattern, the agent loop, skills, characters, scaffolding. 

3• P3 — Prototype with a general  purpose agent.  Use Claude Code, OpenCode, or 

Cursor as pair-programmer and reconnaissance tool to build the first working prototype 

against the real platform. 

• P4 — Harvest, fold, ship as CLI.  Collect tools, security scaffolding, skills, characters, 

and instruction sets discovered in P3; fold them into a small agent loop; ship the result 

as a command-line interface —  the Turtle pattern .

• P5 — Agent  tests  agent.  Use a general-purpose CLI agent to drive the custom agent 

through scenarios; treat behavioural evaluation as a complement to (not a replacement 

for) classical software-engineering testing. 

The title —  Agents All the Way Down  — names the recursive structure of P3–P4–P5: the 

agent the engineer builds is itself a tool that another agent can drive. The general-purpose 

agent that drove the prototype (P3) is the same agent that tests the shipped artifact (P5). The 

orchestrator that composes specialists (§5) is itself an agent. The image is borrowed from 

the cosmological-regress anecdote popularised in modern English by Hawking [Hawking 

1988], who attributes it to a lecture by Bertrand Russell. The methodology takes the image 

seriously and structural-recursively, not paradoxically. 

1.4 Contributions 

This paper makes four contributions: 

1.  A named end  to  end methodology in five phases : substrate, building blocks, proto -

type, ship-as-CLI, agent-tests-agent. To our knowledge no current publication chains 

all five into a single practice (see §2). Each phase has explicit acceptance criteria and an 

anti-mandate list. 

2.  A novel quality  assurance discipline (P5): agent  tests  agent . Classical software-engi -

neering testing provides typing, unit tests, integration tests, and end-to-end tests; all 

four address deterministic behaviour and are necessary but not sufficient for agents, 

whose surface includes stochastic, scenario-shaped behaviour. We frame agent-tests-

agent as a complementary behavioural-evaluation layer: a general-purpose agent 

drives the custom agent through scenarios, observes outputs and tool traces, and 

returns a structured evaluation. Classical testing and agent-tests-agent address different 

failure modes and are best deployed together. 

3.  A multi  agent orchestration model derivable from the methodology itself : once the 

agent is shipped as a CLI (P4), inter-agent composition is just CLI composition. We 

name this  the Turtle corollary  and observe that established orchestration patterns — 

supervisor/worker, parallel fan-out, conditional handoff, Ralph loops [Huntley 2026] 

— emerge naturally without framework primitives. 

4.  An argument — not a demonstrated result — for dependency  aware agent design as 

a security posture . The supply-chain incident record of 2024–2026 (CVE-2024-3094 in 

> xz

, the 2026 PyPI LiteLLM/Telnyx incident, sustained PyPI malware volume) makes 

dependency risk a routine engineering concern, and a custom agent built by this 

4methodology has, by construction, a small dependency surface — all else equal, struc -

turally less exposed than a framework-stack equivalent. We present this as a  posture ,

deliberately of lesser evidentiary weight than contributions (1)–(3): its empirical vali -

dation — measured dependency count and attack-surface comparison across matched 

stacks — is left to future work (§7.2). 

1.5 Scope and audience 

This is a methodology paper: its subject is the practice of building custom agents, end to 

end. The frameworks surveyed in §2 are there to locate that contribution, not to rank them, 

and the AAC and LAMB appear as a worked example whose lessons hold outside the 

EdTech domain they came from (§7.5). 

It assumes a competent practitioner who has used at least one LLM provider API, function 

calling, and one general-purpose code agent such as Claude Code. You need no framework 

experience and no Python — the examples are in Python only because it is convenient. 

1.6 Paper map 

§2 surveys the published agent-construction literature and locates this paper’s contribu -

tion. §3 presents the five phases in sequence, with the preconditions / practice asymmetry 

made explicit at the opener; the framework-free design choice is also explained there. §4 

promotes the P3  → P4  → P5 cycle from addendum to centre — after preconditions are 

in hand, the methodology  is  the cycle. §5 develops the Turtle corollary — orchestration as 

CLI composition — and illustrates the multi-agent pattern. §6 grounds the methodology 

in the AAC build as internal deployment evidence, with the AAC in production at two 

universities since April 2026. §7 discusses when frameworks remain the right choice, the 

supply-chain security argument for dependency-aware design, the build / deploy mem -

ory asymmetry that separates Turtles from Splinters, and open empirical questions. §8 

concludes.  Appendix A  lists acronyms and methodology-specific vocabulary; the reader 

unfamiliar with any of the agent-engineering or software-engineering terminology may 

keep it open alongside the body. 

# 2. Background: AI agent construction, 2022–2026 

The published history of LLM-driven agents is short. We sketch it in four beats to locate 

this paper’s contribution. 

2.1 The chatbot era (2022 – mid  2023) 

The release of ChatGPT in November 2022 [OpenAI 2022] helped make the conversational 

LLM interface a mass-market product surface. The early “agents” of this period were 

prompt-chaining demos — multi-step pipelines orchestrated by hand-written Python, 

with the LLM as a text-in / text-out component. The ReAct paper [Yao et al. 2022] 

articulated reasoning-and-acting as a pattern but appeared before mainstream structured 

5tool-calling APIs were widely available, so it framed the loop conceptually before later API 

standardisation made such loops substantially easier to implement in production settings. 

2.2 The function  calling era (mid  2023 – 2024) 

OpenAI’s introduction of function calling in June 2023 [OpenAI 2023] turned tool invoca -

tion into a first-class API interaction pattern. The LLM could now request a tool by emitting 

a structured object; the host program executed; the result returned as a tool message. 

Anthropic, Google, and the open-weight providers followed within months. Function 

calling became the fundamental agent cycle: prompt  → tool call  → execution  → result  →

next prompt. 

LangChain [LangChain 2026] was one of the most visible early orchestration libraries 

during the first wave of tool-calling applications. Its strength was breadth — every LLM 

provider, every vector database, every external tool wrapped behind a unified API. Its 

retrospective weakness, as reported by practitioners across blogs and conference talks 

during 2024–2025, was the cost of those abstractions: failure modes were difficult to 

diagnose through the framework’s layers. 

2.3 Framework proliferation (2024 – 2025) 

The 2024–2025 period saw the rise of multiple orchestration styles, including graph-based 

(LangGraph [LangChain 2026b]), crew-based (CrewAI [CrewAI Inc. 2026]), multi-agent 

conversation (AutoGen [Wu et al. 2023]), declarative compilation (DSPy [Khattab et 

al. 2023]), and others. Each encoded a distinct opinion about what multi-agent orchestra -

tion should look like. 

Concurrently, the academic community produced methodological precursors that antic -

ipate individual pieces of the practice this paper names. Reflexion [Shinn et al. 2023] 

articulates agent self-reflection — the closest published prior art to P5 (agent-tests-agent). 

Self-Refine [Madaan et al. 2023] explores iterative-refinement patterns. Toolformer [Schick 

et al. 2023] grounds tool use. Voyager [Wang et al. 2023] grounds skill accumulation. The 

2023–2025 survey literature [Wang et al. 2023b; Xi et al. 2023] documents the explosion of 

agent systems but does not propose a unified construction methodology. The same span 

also saw a popular  autonomous  agent wave  — AutoGPT and BabyAGI [Nakajima 2023] 

— which, though not peer-reviewed, was widely influential in popularising the idea of 

an LLM decomposing and pursuing its own task loop; it belongs in an honest chronology 

even though neither offered a reusable construction practice. What this paper contributes 

is a single sequential framing that links such ingredients into a five-phase engineering 

workflow. 

2.4 The code  agent era (2024 – present) 

The release of Claude Code [Anthropic 2026a], followed by OpenCode [Anomaly 2026], 

the maturation of Cursor [Cursor 2026] and Aider [Gauthier 2026], and the spread of 

repository-aware coding agents through GitHub Copilot and similar products, established 

6a new tier of artifact: the  general  purpose code agent . These products increasingly expose 

repository-aware editing, terminal access, and iterative tool use in production settings. 

The code-agent tier did three things to the agent-construction landscape: 

• It demonstrated that custom agent loops were tractable.  Anthropic’s “Building Effec -

tive AI Agents” (December 2024) [Anthropic 2024] documents a small-loop pattern 

in which most additional complexity lives in dispatch, persistence, and security scaf -

folding rather than in framework abstractions; in the same period HuggingFace’s 

SmolAgents [HuggingFace 2024] pushed the complementary  tools-as-code  (code-as-

action) approach, collapsing the tool surface to a single execution path. 

• It gave practitioners a tool for prototyping their own agents.  A code agent driving the 

engineer through a custom agent build is the dynamic this paper’s P3 phase names. 

• It exposed the methodological gap.  Practitioners with access to Claude Code or 

OpenCode could  build  custom agents productively, but the  practice  of building them 

remained scattered across vendor docs, blog posts, podcast appearances, and leaked 

system prompts. 

2.5 The methodological gap 

Across the four eras, the agent-construction literature has converged on a recognisable 

vocabulary (function calling, MCP, the agent loop, skills, evaluation) and a set of orthog -

onal contributions: ReAct for the reasoning loop, Reflexion for self-evaluation, Toolformer 

for tool use, Voyager for skill accumulation, AutoGen for multi-agent conversation, Lang -

Graph for graph orchestration. What is missing is a  named, sequential practice  that chains 

these contributions into a single transferable methodology — across one phase taxonomy, 

with explicit acceptance criteria, framework-independent. The closest existing documents 

— Anthropic’s engineering blog, the MCP specification, the various framework READMEs 

— cover one or two phases each; none cover all five. 

The gap is not that the pieces are missing — it is that no published work chains them. 

The contributions each cover a fragment of the path and stop: Anthropic’s engineering 

writing gives substrate intuitions and an effective-agents framing [Anthropic 2024]; func -

tion-calling and MCP documentation give the tool-use mechanics [Anthropic 2024b; MCP 

2025]; the research line on self-evaluation, tool use, and skill accumulation each formalises 

a single mechanism (Reflexion [Shinn et al. 2023], Toolformer [Schick et al. 2023], Voyager 

[Wang et al. 2023]); the orchestration frameworks (LangGraph, AutoGen, CrewAI) give 

multi-agent coordination; and the surveys catalogue the field without prescribing a build 

[Wang et al. 2023b; Sapkota et al. 2025], the latter distinguishing “AI Agents” from “Agen -

tic AI” as concepts without proposing a construction methodology. Each covers one or two 

phases;  none presents substrate  → building blocks  → prototype  → ship  → test as a 

single named, framework  independent practice with explicit acceptance criteria.  That 

an emerging  agentic software engineering  discipline is now framing modeling, development, 

testing, deployment, and orchestration as one combined area [IEEE Software 2026] signals 

7the same gap from the other side. The contribution of this paper is to fill it, framework-

free by construction. 

# 3. The methodology — five phases 

Figure 1: Figure 1.  The methodology in one diagram  — five phases, two-plus-three: P1 

(substrate) and P2 (building blocks) are preconditions the engineer crosses once and keeps; 

P3 (prototype), P4 (ship as CLI), and P5 (agent-tests-agent) are the practice the engineer 

iterates indefinitely. The dashed arrow from P5 to P3 is the iteration spine (§4) — the 

practice loop the engineer lives in after preconditions are in hand. 

Preconditions and practice — the structural asymmetry of the methodology.  The five 

phases are presented in strict sequence, but they are not five iterations of the same kind 

of work.  P1 (substrate) and P2 (building blocks) are  preconditions  — what the engineer 

must internalise before the methodology can be applied. Their acceptance criteria are 

knowledge : the engineer can read a usage record and diagnose its cost shape (P1); the engi -

neer can name each building block and pick the right one (P2). P1 and P2 are crossed once 

and kept; they are not iterated.  P3 (prototype), P4 (ship as CLI), and P5 (agent  tests  agent) 

are the  practice  itself.  Their acceptance criteria are  artifacts : a working prototype, a CLI 

invocation, a scenario suite. The engineer iterates P3  → P4  → P5  → P3 indefinitely once 

preconditions are in hand.  The methodology’s recursion —  agents all the way down  —

lives in the P3  P5 loop.  P1 and P2 are the floor on which the loop stands. The presentation 

order below preserves the strict sequence, but the reader should hold the asymmetry: P1 

and P2 are read once; P3–P5 are read with the recognition that this is where the engineer’s 

working life happens. 

On frameworks.  The methodology is framework-free by construction. §7.1 sets out the 

engineering reasons — churn-prone abstractions, a larger dependency surface (§7.2) — 

and the cases where a framework is still the right call. 

Phase structure.  Each phase below has (i) a substantive claim, (ii) explicit acceptance 

criteria, and (iii) anti-mandates — things the practitioner should  not  do. The sequence 

matters because each phase’s correctness depends on choices made under the previous 

phase’s framing. 

83.1 P1 — Substrate 

Claim.  The engineer building a custom agent must internalise the LLM as a software 

component. This is more than  use the LLM API correctly . It means keeping five things in 

view at once: 

• how next-token prediction actually works; 

• how the tokeniser shapes both cost and behaviour; 

• the fixed-size context window as a resource every part of the prompt competes for; 

• the alignment stack’s role in setting the model’s defaults; 

• the four practical constraints — cost, hallucination, context, time. 

Without this internalisation, every later decision is taken in the dark. 

A structural framing.  A substantive addition to the standard LLM-as-component framing: 

for Anthropic-style prompt caching [Anthropic 2026b], the cacheable prefix is ordered as 

> tools

, then  system , then  messages :                                  

> [tools ]←declared at agent init; most stable; cached longest
> [system ]←set at session start; stable per session; cached
> [messages ]←grow per turn; only the latest are fresh tokens

9Figure 2: Figure 2.  The cached prefix  — tools → system → messages  as a single layered 

structure handed to the LLM on every call. Volatility increases top-to-bottom; any change 

above invalidates the cache for everything below. 

Stable content placed earlier in that prefix is cheaper to reuse across turns. The discipline 

is to segregate volatility so the stable parts remain cached; volatility is not the same as 

importance (messages are the most volatile and also where the work happens; the lesson 

is about structure, not priority). Any change to  tools  or  system  invalidates the cache for 

everything downstream — reordering tools alphabetically as a “cleanup” can erase a 

session’s accumulated cache. 

Cache pricing in practice.  Current official pricing pages show that cache-read or explicit 

context-caching discounts are often close to one tenth of base input cost on Anthropic 

[Anthropic 2026b], on OpenAI flagship text models [OpenAI 2026], and on Google Gemini 

10 entries where explicit caching is available [Google 2026a; Google 2026b]. DeepSeek’s 

published cache-hit pricing [DeepSeek 2026a; DeepSeek 2026b] is substantially lower 

— model-specific cache-hit multipliers approach 0.02× and below at current rates. 

Google’s explicit caching additionally bills storage.  Cache discounts are provider  and 

model  specific, often substantial, and should be cited directly from current provider 

documentation when reported.  The engineering implication is invariant across providers: 

engineering for cache hits makes the agent cheap and fast by design, not by luck. 

Key  Value (KV) cache discipline.  Tools are declared once at init and immutable during 

the session. System is set once at session start and holds five categories of content: one-

shot tool-use examples, worldview / domain knowledge, persona, directives, memories. 

Messages grow strictly append-only — never rewritten in place, never spliced, never 

popped. Per-turn dynamic context (timestamps, the user’s current question, tool results) 

belongs in messages, not in system: placing stable instructions in the cached prefix and 

keeping volatile per-turn state in message history rather than the system block is the 

recommended posture [Anthropic 2026b]. 

Acceptance.  The engineer can read an LLM call’s usage record and diagnose its cost shape 

on first read. Given a working agent, can identify where its cache prefix begins and ends 

and why each section is positioned where it is. 

Anti  mandate.  Do not put dynamic context (current timestamps, runtime state, the user’s 

current message) into the system prompt for cache hygiene. Do not reorder  tools  or  system 

between sessions if no functional change is needed. 

3.2 P2 — Building blocks 

P2 is the  vocabulary  the methodology operates in. Each block is a tool in the toolkit, not 

a topic in its own right. The goal is to make each block legible enough that P3 and P4 can 

pick the right one off the shelf deliberately. 

Function calling.  The fundamental agent cycle: pass the model a list of tool schemas 

({name, description, parameters} ); when the model decides a tool is needed, it returns 

a structured tool-call object; the host code intercepts, executes, and returns the result as 

a tool-result message. Three operational concerns. First, the  tool-count problem : large tool 

catalogs can degrade focus and increase prompt overhead [Anthropic 2024]; numeric 

thresholds for “too many” should be quantified empirically per use case rather than 

relied on as folklore. Second,  schema design : atomic operations, documentation-quality 

descriptions, JSON-Schema-clean parameters, graceful failure modes. Third,  where security 

lives : never in the schema, never in the description, never in the system prompt, but in 

the scaffolding’s tool dispatcher — prompt instructions help steer behaviour, but authori -

sation and execution policy belong in deterministic host-side controls. 

MCP, CLIs, and the  liteshell  pattern.  The Model Context Protocol [Anthropic 2024b; MCP 

2025] is a useful open standard for connecting LLM applications to tools and external 

context. In local engineering workflows, however, CLI surfaces often remain attractive 

11 because models are heavily exposed to shell documentation and usage patterns during 

pretraining, and because credential-handling differs by transport. The current MCP autho -

risation specification [MCP 2026] covers HTTP-based transports; STDIO transports are 

expected to read credentials from the environment. That is a narrow, transport-specific fact 

about local credential handling. We do not read it as evidence that OAuth-over-MCP is 

immature across the board. 

A cost model, not a single ratio.  The token cost of either surface decomposes cleanly, and 

the comparison is better stated as a calculation than as a headline number. An MCP call 

pays,  per session , for the  tool registry  — every exposed tool’s name, description, and JSON 

schema, fixed at the head of the conversation — and then,  per call , for structured arguments 

and a structured result the model must take into context whole. A CLI call pays for the 

command text and the command’s stdout/stderr, with no per-session registry:                         

> MCP cost ≈tool registry +schema +arguments +structured result +reasoning per
> call
> CLI cost ≈command +terminal output +reasoning per command

The governing quantity is therefore not “MCP versus CLI” in the abstract but 

overhead ≈ (number of exposed tools) × (size of each tool’s description and schema) 

× (verbosity of returned data). 

The MCP specification makes the registry explicit — tools are named operations with 

descriptions, typed inputs, and metadata exposed to the model [MCP 2025] — and 

Anthropic’s own engineering guidance notes that connecting many MCP servers creates 

enough tool context to motivate code-execution patterns that reduce it [Anthropic 2026c]. 

The same variables bound the CLI side too: a CLI that dumps huge raw output (verbose 

logs, untrimmed JSON, stack traces) can cost  more  than a well-scoped MCP tool. The 

engineering discipline is to keep tool registries small and outputs trimmed, on whichever 

surface — but the CLI starts from a structurally lower baseline because it carries no registry. 

Reading the published reports through that model rather than as one number yields the 

following shape: 

Workload  MCP token cost vs a lean 

CLI call 

What drives it 

Single well-scoped tool, 

atomic action 

≈ 1.2×–2×  one tool’s schema + one 

structured result 

Multi-step task, several 

tools loaded 

≈ 2×–6×  a registry of many tool de -

scriptions + per-step JSON 

Large / noisy tool registry  > 10×  registry tokens dominate 

the context window 

12 Workload  MCP token cost vs a lean 

CLI call 

What drives it 

CLI with trimmed output  baseline  command text + concise 

stdout 

CLI with huge raw output  can exceed MCP  undisciplined stdout (logs, 

dumps, stack traces) 

Table 1: MCP-versus-CLI token overhead as a function of tool count, schema verbosity, and result 

size — not a fixed ratio. The bands are indicative (reasoned from the cost model above); the measured 

data points are the three benchmarks cited below. 

The headline practitioner benchmarks sit at the high end of this range, exactly as their 

conditions predict: a controlled matched-task benchmark reports ≈35× more tokens via 

MCP than via CLI (with task-completion reliability dropping from 100% to 72% on harder 

scenarios) [MindStudio 2026]; a single GitHub language-check costs ~1,365 tokens via  gh 

against ~44,026 via the matching MCP server [Vensas 2026]; and a GitHub MCP server 

exposing 93 tools adds ~55,000 tokens of registry overhead at session start versus ~200 

for the  gh  equivalent [Reinhard 2026]. These are large-catalogue, many-call measurements 

— we report them as the upper end of the model above, not as a universal ratio. The 

directional claim is invariant across the whole range: MCP carries fixed-and-variable token 

overhead that CLI does not, and that overhead  compounds across repeated agent calls .

Token volume is not the only axis, and arguably not the deepest one. A second, qualitative 

difference is  composability . An MCP tool returns a fixed result structure that the model 

must take into context  whole  and then filter by reasoning over it; a CLI returns a stream 

that the model can compose with the shell’s own filters — piping through  jq , grep , head ,

or a one-off script — so that the model narrows the result  before  the bytes ever enter the 

context window. The practitioner argument is that this makes context pollution the default 

failure mode of MCP and an avoidable one under CLI:  “as a model I always have to get the 

huge blob back… but if I would build the same as a CLI… it could just add a JQ command and 

filter itself… you have no context pollution”  [Steinberger 2026]. The same source notes the 

historical value MCP nonetheless delivered — it pushed providers to expose APIs that a 

CLI can now be written over — and concedes the case where MCP’s stateful session model 

genuinely fits, the canonical example being browser automation [Steinberger 2026]. We 

treat that as the boundary condition, not the refutation: CLI is the default surface; MCP 

earns its place where a tool requires sustained stateful interaction the shell idiom does not 

model cleanly. 

The  liteshell  pattern — a name for a convergent practice.  When the custom agent 

runs inside a cloud application — FastAPI, Spring Boot, Django, Express — there is no 

host shell to invoke. Engineers building custom agents through 2024–2026 have been 

convergently rediscovering the same workaround, and it is an old one with a name: the 

13 Facade  [Gamma et al. 1994] — a single, simplified interface placed in front of a complex 

subsystem. A liteshell  is  that Facade, with two specifics that make it worth its own name: 

the simplified interface it presents is  CLI  shaped , and the consumer it presents it to is 

the LLM . Concretely: build a small in-process facade that  presents itself to the LLM as if it 

were a CLI , then dispatch each “invocation” to a Python method or a loopback call against 

the application’s own REST API. The model sees  call_cli tickets list --status=open ;

the host parses the string, dispatches, returns the result as a tool message. The shape is 

one tool in  tools[]  (the dispatch tool), one auth setup at library init, and one short skill 

(markdown) with two one-shot examples — enough for the model to extrapolate the rest 

from its pretraining exposure to shell idioms. 

The contribution here is naming, not invention  — we did not invent these; we named them ,

in the lineage of [Gamma et al. 1994], where  Design Patterns  did not invent the patterns 

it described but gave them a vocabulary that thirty years of software engineering then 

borrowed. We give this pattern the name  liteshell  because, to our knowledge, no widely-

adopted name exists for it, and its underlying components are decidedly not novel: the 

Facade pattern is thirty years old [Gamma et al. 1994]; code-execution tools that give the 

LLM a single dispatch surface — Anthropic’s Computer Use with its bash and computer 

tools [Anthropic 2024c], HuggingFace’s SmolAgents with the tools-as-code pattern [Hug -

gingFace 2024] — predate this paper and embody the same structural move (collapse the 

tool surface to one execution tool; let the model author what to invoke); the Anthropic 

Skills format [Anthropic 2025] provides the markdown-skill convention we use to teach 

the model the invocation grammar; and GitHub’s  gh  and Google’s  gws  are  external  liteshells 

the engineering community has already standardised on, distributed as packaged binaries 

rather than as a class inside the engineer’s own application.  What this paper adds is the 

name, the locating, and the worked example. 

Why the name earns its place.  The liteshell carries the CLI-over-MCP token argument 

into the cloud-runtime case. The benchmarks above measured  external  CLIs ( gh , gws ); the 

liteshell extends the same advantage to where no host shell exists, because the model still 

treats the in-process facade as a CLI and applies the same pre-trained shell knowledge. 

Naming the pattern makes it a deliberate engineering choice rather than an accident of 

implementation. 

The agent loop.  A minimal tool-calling loop can be implemented directly in a small 

amount of host-language code, with most additional complexity living in dispatch, per -

sistence, and security scaffolding rather than the loop body itself [Anthropic 2024]. The 

structure:                    

> messages =[]
> while True :
> response =llm .chat (
> tools =tools ,#static, declared at init
> system =system_prompt ,#static, set at session start
> messages =messages ,#grows append-only

14 )           

> if not response .tool_calls :
> return response .content
> for tc in response .tool_calls :
> result =dispatch (tc )#scaffolding's responsibility
> messages .append (assistant_turn (tc ))
> messages .append (tool_result (result ))

Listing 1: A minimal agent loop. The boundary does real work — the LLM thinks and chooses; the 

scaffolding does everything else. 

Skills, characters, instruction sets.  The content layer of P2, living in the system prompt. 

Skills  are markdown files describing how to do a specific thing — loaded into the system 

prompt at session start or on demand, editable without changing code.  Characters  are 

voice / stance / register — they constrain which outputs the model considers plausible. 

Instruction sets  are rules — the must-dos and must-not-dos in the system prompt’s direc -

tives section. Discipline: do not put security in the instruction set. Instructions shape 

behaviour ; the scaffolding’s allow-list shapes  outcomes .

Hooks.  The deterministic counterpart to the content layer. A  hook  is a host-side function 

that fires on a fixed point in the agent’s lifecycle — most importantly  before a tool 

call executes  (pre-tool-use ), but also on session start, on tool result, or before output is 

returned. Where instructions and skills  steer  the model probabilistically, a hook  enforces 

outcomes in ordinary code: it is where the allow-list is actually checked, where a requested  

> call_cli

is admitted or denied, where a skill or a tool argument can be scanned before 

it is trusted (a deployed instance of this pattern scans every contributed skill through a 

malware-detection service before the agent may load it [Steinberger 2026]). Hooks are the 

mechanism that makes the §3.2 discipline —  security lives in the scaffolding, not the prompt 

— concrete: the instruction set expresses intent, the hook is the gate. P4 (§3.4) shows the  

> pre-tool-use

hook folded into the loop. 

Acceptance.  The engineer can name each of these blocks and pick the right one for a given 

problem. Has implemented at least one custom tool with proper schema; has driven the 

agent loop manually (without a framework) for at least one toy problem. 

Anti  mandate.  Adopting a framework before this vocabulary is internalised is the most 

common path to opaque failure modes later. Frameworks remain a defensible engineering 

choice once the building blocks are in hand (see §7); before that, framework adoption 

typically substitutes API fluency for principle fluency. 

3.3 P3 — Prototype with a general  purpose agent 

P3 is where the methodology becomes a practice rather than a body of knowledge. The 

move:  use a general  purpose agent — Claude Code, OpenCode, Cursor — as a pair 

programming partner and reconnaissance tool , with the explicit goal of building a custom 

agent for a specific application. 

15 The reconnaissance step.  Before any custom agent code is written, the general-purpose 

agent surveys the platform the engineer is building inside. For the AAC build (see §6), this 

was the first session: Claude Code walked LAMB through its existing  lamb-cli  tool —  lamb 

> assistant list

, lamb model list , lamb kb list . The first gap discovered was that no  lamb  

> rubric

command existed, even though assistants referenced rubrics.  The reconnaissance 

step exposes what is missing before the custom  agent design begins. 

Architecture  discovered  by  building.  The classical software-engineering move is to de -

sign the architecture first, then build to specification. The methodology’s move is to  build 

first  and let the architecture emerge from what works and what does not. Three things 

engineers commonly discover this way: where their data actually lives (often not where 

the design diagram says); what tool surface the LLM can drive cleanly (often coarser than 

the platform’s API surface); and where the security boundary belongs (almost always at 

the scaffolding’s tool dispatch, not in the prompt). The reconnaissance pass produces a 

working prototype, a list of needed tools, a first draft of the system prompt, and a list 

of gaps. 

Tools and security in P3.  Tool dispatch is in host code, not in the model’s text. Allow-list 

everything — the model can  request  call_cli ls /tmp ; the host code decides whether  ls /  

> tmp

is allowed. 

A note on secrets:  never expose a secret to the model, never persist one in a prompt, 

never log one in plaintext. When the agent needs a credential, fetch it from an approved 

secret store at runtime and pass it only over an authenticated, secure channel.  A

common manifestation is operating-system keychain integration: the credential lives in 

the keychain, the runtime fetches it on demand, and it never appears as a string in tool 

arguments, the system prompt, or model output. These are not implementation details; 

they are the methodology’s security contract, established in P3 and inherited by P4. 

Acceptance.  A working prototype demonstrates the agent’s core loop against the real 

platform. A list of tools — pre-existing CLIs and new liteshell entries — is in hand. A first 

draft of the system prompt with one or two skills loaded exists. A documented list of gaps 

(missing APIs, security boundary questions, ambiguous authorisation cases) is recorded. 

Anti  mandate.  Do not skip P3 because the architecture is  already known . It is not. The 

architecture emerges from the build; the few hours of reconnaissance save days of P4 

rework. 

3.4 P4 — Harvest, fold, ship as CLI (the Turtle pattern) 

P4 is the engineering phase: take what was discovered in P3 and produce the production 

agent. The phase has three movements:  harvest , fold , and  ship as CLI .

Harvest.  From P3′s working prototype: tools (schemas + implementations, pulled into a 

clean  tools/  directory); security scaffolding (the allow-list, secret-retrieval setup, autho -

risation policy); skills (promoted from loose snippets to first-class version-controlled 

16 markdown files); characters (promoted from experimental phrasing to explicit persona 

content); instruction sets (rules, the directives section). The prototype’s system prompt is 

usually a mess of inline instructions; harvest is a deliberate collection step. 

Fold into a small loop.  The reference shape generalises Listing 1 with two additions, both 

promoted from prototype to first-class: a  session store  that persists the growing  messages[] 

list between turns under a session id, and a  pre  tool  use hook  — the explicit security check 

that runs in host code on every tool call the model emits,  before  the tool actually executes 

(the  Hooks  block of §3.2, now doing its real work). Listing 2 shows the hook folded into the 

loop: the only change to the body is that  dispatch  is now gated by the hook, which admits 

or denies the call deterministically before any side effect occurs. Everything else is the 

surrounding state-and-policy machinery that graduates from  “the prototype’s shortcut”  to 

“the production agent’s discipline” . The cache discipline from P1 is preserved by construction: 

tools immutable at instantiation, system immutable per session, messages append-only.                       

> for tc in response .tool_calls :
> if pre_tool_use_hook (tc ):#deterministic security gate
> result =dispatch (tc )#allowed →execute
> else :
> result =denied (tc )#blocked before any side effect
> messages .append (assistant_turn (tc ))
> messages .append (tool_result (result ))

Listing 2: the  pre-tool-use  hook folded into the loop body of Listing 1. The agent still proposes the 

call; the hook — ordinary host code, not a model decision — decides whether it runs. This is where 

the allow-list lives, and why authorisation never belongs in the prompt. 

Ship as a CLI tool — the Turtle pattern. 

The defining move of P4:  the agent is itself a CLI tool . Not a chat window in a browser, 

not a hidden endpoint on a backend, not an SDK to be imported elsewhere. A command-

line program with a stable invocation shape:                       

> turtle "do thing"
> →response +new-session-id
> turtle <session-id> "do next thing"
> →continues the session
> turtle --list-sessions
> turtle <session-id> --replay
> →re-runs the session (traceable; reproducibility caveat below)

Listing 3: the Turtle-pattern CLI invocation shape — stateless calls, session-keyed continuation, 

replay, and  --help  for the next agent. 

We name this  the Turtle pattern . The name points, deliberately, to three things at once. 

The proximate reference is the  turtles all the way down  image that gives the methodology 

its name and that anchors P5 (§3.5). The deeper reference is Seymour Papert’s Logo 

turtle [Papert 1980], the canonical educational-programming primitive — children’s first 

17 encounter with autonomous symbolic action, and the historical antecedent of the agent-

as-instructable-actor framing. The third is more practical: a CLI is, by construction, a tool 

that another agent can drive. 

The agent has: 

• Stateless invocation  per call (the session store is the state-holding surface). 

• Session  id  keyed continuation  for multi-turn use. 

• Structured outputs  — the response itself + the session id + optionally a JSON sidecar 

with tool traces. 

• --help  that works  — both for human readers and for the agent driver in P5. 

A reproducibility caveat: the  --replay  flag should be framed as  traceable or approximately 

reproducible  rather than as a deterministic re-run guarantee. Bit-exact determinism across 

LLM invocations requires provider-specific guarantees, fixed seeds where supported, and 

matching runtime versions; in practice replay is most useful for inspection, diff-against-

rerun, and behavioural debugging rather than as a regression-test substitute. 

The design constraint:  the agent must be built so that it is friendly for the  other agent  to drive .

A chat-window-in-a-corner deployment is not testable by another agent. A CLI is. This 

single discipline —  built for the next agent to drive  — shapes the I/O surface choices that 

make P5 tractable. 

Acceptance.  The agent has a CLI invocation that returns reliably. Sessions persist, can be 

resumed, can be replayed (as a trace, not as a bit-exact rerun). Tools, system prompt, skills, 

characters live in version-controlled files (markdown for skills/characters; host-language 

code for tools; structured config for security). Security is enforced in the scaffolding’s tool 

dispatcher, not in the prompt. The CLI’s output is parseable enough that a general-purpose 

agent can drive it — see §3.5. 

Anti  mandate.  Do not put authorisation logic in the prompt. (This is the AAC build’s 

most-repeated lesson — see §6.) Do not ship without  --help  working; that removes the 

next agent’s onboarding surface. 

3.5 P5 — Agent  tests  agent 

P5 is the methodology’s novel piece. Classical software-engineering testing — typing, 

unit tests, integration tests, end-to-end tests — was developed for deterministic software. 

Agents are stochastic; they have a behavioural surface that classical testing cannot exer -

cise cleanly. Deterministic tests remain necessary for invariants, interfaces, and failure 

handling, but agentic behaviour also benefits from scenario-based behavioural evaluation. 

The closing image, again:  agents all the way down . The custom agent is tested by another 

agent. That testing agent is itself driven by an agent.  The principle is recursion, not 

paradox. 

The pattern.  A general-purpose CLI agent (Claude Code, OpenCode) is given three inputs: 

(i) a scenario — natural-language description of a task the custom agent should be able to 

18 handle; (ii) the custom agent’s CLI invocation (the Turtle interface from §3.4); and (iii) an 

evaluation rubric describing what counts as a pass, what counts as a fail, what edge cases 

to probe. 

The general-purpose agent then drives the custom agent through the scenario, observes 

outputs and tool traces, probes edge cases (adversarial inputs, ambiguous requests, multi-

turn drift), and returns a structured evaluation: pass/fail per criterion, with evidence 

quotes from the transcript. The published Reflexion line [Shinn et al. 2023] anticipates the 

verbal-feedback aspect of this pattern; what is added here is naming the discipline, locating 

it in the methodology’s sequence, and pairing it with a CLI artifact designed to be driven. 

What this gives.  Four properties classical testing cannot: 

1.  Behavioural regression testing.  “Does the agent still refuse to leak credentials when asked 

cleverly?”  is not a unit test; it is a P5 test. 

2.  LLM  comparison testing.  Same scenario, different backbone — different providers, 

different model sizes — produces apples-to-apples behavioural comparison under a 

controlled scenario suite. 

3.  Documentation generation as a side effect.  The evaluation agent’s transcripts are 

example interactions; the good ones flow into the documentation. 

4.  The improvement loop.  Failures reveal gaps; gaps go back into P3 as next-iteration 

prototypes; the methodology cycles (see §4). 

§6 instantiates this discipline against the AAC build: driving the custom agent with a 

general-purpose agent surfaced a catalogue of behavioural defects that narrow developer 

tests had missed (Tables 3 and 4), each generalising to an anti-mandate — concrete 

evidence of what P5 catches that classical testing does not. 

The post  build refactor elicitation.  A lightweight, high-yield variant of the improvement 

loop runs at the  end  of every build or change, not only when a test fails. The engineer 

asks the general-purpose agent that just produced the work a deliberately retrospective 

question —  what would you refactor now that this exists?  — and acts on the friction it names. 

The premise is that some design defects are visible only once the artifact exists and has 

been exercised; eliciting them immediately, while the full working context is still loaded, 

is cheaper than rediscovering them on the next iteration. The same logic governs the 

engineer’s own experience: a recurring point of friction in operating the agent — or in 

operating the surrounding toolchain — is itself a P5 signal, and the disciplined response 

is to spend the next iteration removing the friction at its source rather than working 

around it. This is established practitioner discipline:  “almost every time I merge a PR, build a 

feature, afterwards I ask, ‘what can we refactor?’ … because then you build it and you feel the pain 

points”  [Steinberger 2026]. 

Classical testing sits alongside P5.  P5 does not replace classical testing. The two address 

different failure modes and are best treated as complementary. The full stack: 

19 Figure 3: Figure 3.  The testing stack with P5 inserted between classical software-engineering 

testing and human review. 

The classical layers test that the plumbing is correct (deterministic behaviour, no excep -

tions, types match). The P5 layer tests that the  behaviour  is correct (the agent does what a 

user needs it to do, refuses what it should refuse, recovers from what it should recover 

from). For production deployments, both classes of test address different failure modes 

and are best deployed together. 

Acceptance.  A scenario suite covering the agent’s primary responsibilities exists. A 

general-purpose CLI agent can drive the suite end-to-end without manual intervention. 

The evaluation output is structured (pass/fail per criterion, with evidence). At least two 

backbones have been tested against the same scenarios. The gap list from the most recent 

P5 run is the input to the next P3 iteration. 

Anti  mandate.  P5 is continuous: every change to tools, system prompt, skills, or character 

should re-run the scenario suite. Testing the tools individually is unit testing; agent-tests-

agent is behavioural testing; they exercise different failure modes and are not substitutes. 

20 4. The methodology is the cycle 

Once preconditions P1 and P2 are in the engineer’s hands,  the methodology is the cycle 

P3  → P4  → P5  → P3 — and the engineer spends the rest of the agent’s life inside it. §3 

presented the phases sequentially because they have to be introduced sequentially; this 

section names what the phases become operationally, which is  a single cyclic practice with 

three named stations .

Figure 4: Figure 4.  The methodology after preconditions — the practice is the cycle P3  → P4  →

P5  → P3. The engineer iterates indefinitely; P1 and P2 do not re-enter the loop because they were 

internalised once. 

The structural property the cycle inherits from the preconditions.  The cycle is  cheap 

because of P1. Most of the agent’s prefix (tools + system) does not change between 

iterations, so cache hits dominate. Under current provider prompt-caching schemes (§3.1), 

each pass through the cycle is a small addition on top of the previous pass, not a rebuild 

from scratch. An engineer who iterates ten times in a quarter pays about the cost of one 

disciplined initial build plus ten thin refresh layers — not ten initial builds. 

A back-of-envelope example makes the shape concrete. Take an agent with a stable prefix 

(tools + system) of ~20K tokens and ~2K tokens of fresh work per iteration. Without cache 

discipline, ten iterations re-pay the full ~22K each time: ~220K input tokens. With the 

prefix cached at the ≈0.1× cache-read rate typical of current providers (§3.1), the same ten 

iterations cost one full prefix (~20K), ten cached reads of it (10 × 20K × 0.1 ≈ 20K), and 

ten fresh deltas (10 × 2K ≈ 20K) — about  60K effective input tokens, under a third . The 

numbers are illustrative; the direction is structural. The larger and more stable the prefix, 

the more the cycle rewards cache discipline. 

Why iteration matters substantively, not just economically.  In our experience building 

the AAC, each pass through the cycle made the agent measurably more capable: a single 

pass produced a less capable agent than three passes, and three passes a less capable agent 

than one re-tested every release. We report this as an observation from the construction 

period rather than a controlled result. The reason is that P5 (agent-tests-agent) is  the only 

place in the methodology that surfaces behavioural defects  — defects classical testing 

was not designed to detect, in a stochastic substrate that classical testing does not exercise. 

Each cycle is a behavioural-quality bump.  Skipping the cycle is choosing to ship the 

version of the agent that has been least exposed to other agents’ attempts to break it. 

21 Why this cycle remains tractable at production scale.  Cheap iteration on a transparent 

small loop survives the production calendar because the iteration cost does not include 

re-learning a framework’s evolving abstractions. A framework refactor between minor 

versions (LangChain v0.x  → v0.y, observed multiple times during 2024–2025) imposes an 

iteration tax  on every team using the framework, independent of any change to the team’s 

own agent. A framework-free cycle, built on stable primitives (function-calling APIs, MCP, 

CLI semantics), carries no such tax. The engineer’s iteration cost is bounded by their own 

substrate, not by an upstream maintainer’s release schedule. 

The over  orchestration trap.  There is a characteristic maturity arc in how engineers 

structure agentic work, and the methodology is calibrated to its endpoint. Newcomers 

begin with short, direct prompts; as they gain fluency they tend to over-build — elaborate 

multi-agent orchestration, long chains of bespoke sub-agents, large libraries of custom 

commands — on the assumption that sophistication scales with machinery; the most 

experienced practitioners then converge  back  on short prompts and a small, transparent 

loop, having found that the elaborate middle stage mostly adds failure surface. One 

practitioner names this middle stage the  agentic trap  [Steinberger 2026]. The P3  → P4  →

P5 cycle deposits the engineer at the far end of that arc by construction: the deliverable of 

P4 is a single small loop, and the corollary of §5 derives multi-agent structure as plain CLI 

composition rather than as a dedicated orchestration layer. The trap is real and common; 

the methodology avoids it not by exhortation but by the shape of the practice. 

A note on stopping.  The methodology does not name an end-state. There is no “com -

pleted” agent under this practice; there are versions of the agent that have passed the most 

recent scenario suite under the current LLM backbone.  “Done”  is a release decision the 

engineer takes against acceptable behavioural-defect density on the latest P5 run, not a 

state the methodology promises. This is honest about the artifact’s nature: a custom agent 

is a  living artifact , like a service or a library that depends on an evolving runtime — its 

quality is maintained by ongoing iteration, not certified at a single point in time. 

# 5. Orchestration as CLI composition — the Turtle corollary 

The methodology produces, in P4, a custom agent shipped as a CLI. The agent has  call_cli 

in its tool list, used in P3 and P4 to invoke the platform’s existing CLIs ( gh , gws , lamb-cli ,

the liteshell). It follows immediately that  another agent’s CLI is just another tool . There 

is no architectural distinction between: 

• call_cli gh issue list --label bug 

• call_cli donatello "review this PR for security concerns" 

• call_cli leonardo --strategy "decompose this multi-step task" 

All three are: parent emits a structured tool call  → scaffolding dispatches  → subprocess 

runs  → output captured  → result becomes a tool-result message in the parent’s message 

22 stream. The parent does not know whether it called a Go binary, a bash script, or another 

LLM under the hood.  The CLI contract is the orchestration interface. 

Multi-agent orchestration in this methodology is therefore  not a phase  — it is a  corollary .

The agents built under P4 compose with one another because they compose the way every 

other CLI composes. 

5.1 What the corollary gives 

1.  Heterogeneous backbones.  A supervisor running on one provider’s flagship can dele -

gate to a research worker on a different provider, and a verification worker on a local 

model — the parent does not care; each child’s CLI is the contract. 

2.  Process isolation.  A child that crashes or hangs does not crash the parent — the parent 

sees a failed  call_cli  (non-zero exit or timeout) and recovers, and the child’s memory 

is reclaimed by the operating system when it exits (see the shared-host caveat below). 

3.  Independent deployability.  A new version of the writer agent replaces the old one 

without touching the orchestrator. The CLI surface is the API. 

4.  Parallelism via the shell.  turtle "X" & turtle "Y" & wait  — the primitive bash has 

provided for decades. The parent batches invocations and the scaffolding parallelises 

at dispatch. 

5.  Composition with non  agent CLIs.  An orchestrator calls a Turtle calls  kubectl  calls 

another Turtle calls  gh . Agents are not a special node type in the orchestration graph — 

they are CLIs with stochastic behaviour. Most frameworks silo agent-to-agent flow into 

one abstraction layer and tool-use into another; here they share one surface. 

6.  Replayability and audit.  Each agent has a transcript. The parent’s transcript references 

children by invocation. Grep, diff, replay — the trace surface is the same one used for 

single-agent debugging. 

A shared  host caveat — for (2) and (4).  Process isolation and shell parallelism are  fault- and 

composition-level properties, not  resource-level ones. When the orchestrator and its children 

share a host, memory, CPU, and file descriptors are common: a child that exhausts RAM 

can trigger the host out-of-memory killer. The kernel picks its victim by heuristics, and may 

kill the parent or an unrelated process rather than the offending child. Unbounded  &-fan-

out only multiplies the pressure. Resource isolation is therefore not free; the scaffolding 

must impose it, with per-child limits ( ulimit  / setrlimit  RLIMIT_AS , a cgroup  memory.max ,

a container, or a separate host) and a concurrency cap on parallel children. This is the 

same scaffolding discipline as the recursion-depth budget (§5.4): the substrate gives fault 

isolation; resource isolation is bought. 

5.2 The Ninja Turtles — a multi  agent topology 

A natural specialisation topology, illustrated using a four-character pattern that gave this 

paper’s mascot its name: 

23 Agent  Role  What it does 

Splinter  Orchestrator / master  The parent agent that de -

composes the task and del -

egates. Picks which special -

ist receives which sub-task. 

Leonardo  Planner / strategist  Given an under-specified 

goal, produces a structured 

plan. Returns a list of steps 

with dependencies. 

Donatello  Researcher / engineer  Operates RAG pipelines, 

web search, codebase in -

spection, document analy -

sis. Returns evidence with 

citations. 

Michelangelo  Writer / communicator  Produces user-facing arti -

facts: prose, code, slides, 

summaries. Adapts regis -

ter to the audience. 

Raphael  Executor  The agent with side-effect 

privileges: file writes, API 

calls, deployments, irre -

versible operations. Gated 

by the strictest allow-list. 

Table 2: the Ninja Turtles multi-agent role taxonomy — one specialist Turtle per role, each shipped 

as its own CLI. 

A typical orchestration: Splinter receives the task, asks Leonardo for a plan, dispatches 

Donatello to gather evidence, hands the evidence and plan to Michelangelo to draft an 

artifact, and finally invokes Raphael to commit / deploy / send. Each step is a  call_cli 

invocation from Splinter; each child is a Turtle CLI; each has its own session, its own 

scaffolding, its own allow-list. Concretely, from Splinter’s perspective the delegation is 

nothing more than calling other CLIs:                                                

> #Splinter (orchestrator) —each delegate is just another CLI
> plan =$(call_cli leonardo "plan: migrate auth to OAuth-over-MCP "--json )
> evidence =$(call_cli donatello "gather: current auth code paths +the OAuth-MCP
> spec "--json )
> draft =$(call_cli michelangelo "write the migration guide "--plan "$plan "--
> evidence "$evidence ")
> call_cli raphael "apply the migration "--plan "$plan "--depth 1#side effects:
> strictest allow-list

24 Listing 4: Splinter orchestrating the specialist Turtles — delegation is plain  call_cli  composition, 

with the plan passed as an ordinary shell variable. 

The plan flows from Leonardo into Raphael as an ordinary shell variable; no shared typed-

state object, no framework message bus. The naming homage is a cultural reference that 

also reinforces the through-line to Papert’s Logo turtle via the Turtle pattern (§3.4). 

5.3 Ralph loops as a sub  case 

The convergence-loop pattern named after Geoffrey Huntley’s  Ralph  essay [Huntley 2026] 

is trivially expressible as a CLI in this methodology, because it  is  bash:                                         

> #ralph.sh —convergence loop, ship as aCLI tool
> goal ="$1";check_cli ="$2";max_iter ="${3:-10 }"
> session =$(uuidgen )
> for iin $(seq 1"$max_iter ");do
> turtle "$session ""make progress on: $goal "
> "$check_cli "&& {echo "converged in $iiter ";exit 0;}
> done
> echo "did not converge in $max_iter iter ";exit 1

Listing 5: The Ralph loop, packaged as a CLI.  The orchestrator invokes  call_cli ralph "fix    

> bug X" check_bug.sh 10

. The convergence check is the handoff protocol: the child writes 

the artifact; the check reads it; the loop continues based on the check’s exit code.  Bash 

semantics carry the orchestration logic.  No framework primitive required. 

5.4 Where the corollary leaks — what frameworks still do better 

The corollary covers a substantial portion of multi-agent need, but it is not complete. 

Six places where a framework still offers something the bare corollary does not — in 

some a genuine missing capability, in others only turnkey convenience over equivalent 

engineering: 

1.  Shared typed state across agents.  Frameworks like LangGraph [LangChain 2026b] 

give typed  StateGraph  abstractions where multiple agents share a structured object. CLI 

composition requires the engineer to build the equivalent with files on disk or a SQLite 

blackboard — solvable, but engineering effort rather than provided primitive. 

2.  Streaming partial results across the orchestration tree.  A subprocess returns when it 

exits. For interactive user experience requiring per-token streaming from leaf to root, 

frameworks provide streaming primitives; CLI composition requires the engineer to 

rebuild the equivalent (typically with JSONL on stdout). 

3.  Durable, suspendable, resumable workflows.  Workflow systems (Temporal [Tempo -

ral 2026], Inngest [Inngest 2026], restate.dev [Restate 2026]) provide state machines 

with retries, timeouts, idempotency, and durable suspend/resume. CLI orchestration 

provides none of those. For workflows with strict resume semantics, framework or 

workflow-engine territory. 

4.  Typed handoff schemas.  Frameworks let the engineer declare a structured schema for 

inter-agent messages. CLI gives text or JSON; validation is on the caller. 

25 5.  Unified observability across the tree.  Multi-agent tracing tools render a run as a unified 

graph; CLI composition gives independent per-agent transcripts that must be joined. 

This is the softest of the six, because the hook building-block (§3.2) closes it: a hook that 

emits a structured event on every tool call and child invocation into a shared append-

only log lets ordinary tooling join the per-agent transcripts into one trace. The authors 

have built exactly such a layer for a multi-agent workshop — hooks emitting presence 

and advisory-lock events into a shared store, joined and rendered by a small script-and-

skill toolchain, released as an open example [Legati Workshop 2026] — so for this item 

a framework buys  turnkey rendering , not a capability the corollary otherwise lacks; it sits 

with (1) and (2) as engineering effort rather than a missing primitive. 

6.  Recursion depth budgets.  A naïve sub-instance can spawn its own sub-instances. The 

methodology must declare a depth metric — either as an allow-list constraint or as a   

> --depth N

argument that decrements. The LLM will not set its own depth limit; the 

scaffolding has to. Concretely: the orchestrator passes  --depth N  on every child invoca -

tion; the child’s pre-tool-use hook (§3.2) reads it, refuses any  call_cli  to another Turtle 

when  N ≤ 0, and otherwise dispatches the grandchild with  --depth N-1 . The budget is 

enforced in host code on the way down, so a runaway delegation chain terminates at a 

fixed, auditable depth rather than at wherever the model happens to stop. 

These are the criteria for  when to reach for a framework anyway  (see §7) — a genuine 

missing capability for the durable-workflow, typed-handoff, and depth-budget cases (3, 

4, 6), and a convenience trade-off where the corollary is already reachable with modest 

engineering (1, 2, 5). 

# 6. Internal deployment evidence — the AAC (Agent  Assisted Creator) 

The AAC (Agent-Assisted Creator) is a custom agent for the LAMB educational platform 

[LAMB Project], built over roughly ten days (28 March – 6 April 2026) by a single devel -

oper working with an AI pair-programmer, and  in production at two universities since 

April 2026 : Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC, ~150 educator-creators) and the 

University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU, ~50). It assists educators — not engineers 

— in creating, refining, and testing AI tutors within LAMB without leaving the platform. 

The build pre-dated the methodology’s articulation; the methodology was crystallised 

by recognising the practice the AAC build had instantiated. The case-study evidence 

in this section is  internal deployment experience ; build logs, the issue tracker, and the 

production-deployment record are the primary sources. We summarise the mapping here 

and report results that are characterisable from internal logs rather than from externally 

reproducible benchmarks. 

The mapping is exact enough to be diagnostic: 

P1 instantiation.  The four practical constraints (cost, hallucination, context, time) were live 

engineering pressures from the first prototype; cache-hygiene discipline was developed 

26 during the build as the AAC’s token costs revealed where the cached prefix was being 

invalidated. The structural framing ( tools → system → messages ) crystallised post-hoc 

while the build was being structured into formal teaching material, when the build’s 

empirical cost shape made the structural claim visible against Anthropic’s prompt-caching 

documentation [Anthropic 2026b]. 

P2 instantiation.  Function calling drives every AAC operation. The  lamb-cli  tool was de -

veloped in parallel with the agent as a liteshell, exposing the LAMB platform’s assistant / 

model / knowledge-base / rubric operations. Skills, characters, and instruction sets were 

the artifacts that survived from the prototype’s system prompt into production. 

P3 instantiation.  Claude Code drove the first AAC prototype against the live LAMB plat -

form. The reconnaissance session revealed that no  lamb rubric  command existed despite 

assistants referencing rubrics — the first architectural gap, surfaced by the act of building. 

P4 instantiation.  The AAC ships as  aac , a Turtle-pattern CLI. Sessions, replay (as trace, 

not bit-exact rerun),  --help  for the next agent — all in place. Security lives entirely in the 

scaffolding’s allow-list. The architecture went through three crystallisations during P4, 

and the sequence is itself the clearest illustration of  architecture-discovered-by-building :

1.  HTTP  only.  The agent called the LAMB application over loopback REST. This gave 

clean request/response boundaries, but it paid a network round-trip on every tool call 

and complicated local authentication. 

2.  Direct  call.  The agent invoked the application’s Python methods directly. This removed 

the round-trip, but it bypassed the application’s own request pipeline — authentication, 

validation, middleware — which then had to be re-implemented agent-side and drifted 

out of sync. 

3.  HTTP  with  ASGI.  The agent calls its own API through an in-process ASGI transport. 

This recovers the full request pipeline of (1) with the in-process speed of (2), and no 

open socket. 

None of this was designed up front. Each architecture was adopted, exercised, and found 

wanting until the build surfaced the one that held. 

P5 instantiation.  Driving the AAC with a general-purpose agent (Claude Code) through 

realistic educator scenarios — exactly the agent-tests-agent pattern of §3.5 — surfaced 

a class of behavioural regressions that the narrow developer tests had missed, and that 

internal documentation logs as the “seven bugs.” Each generalises to a P5 discipline and 

an anti-mandate. Tables 3 and 4 give four representative cases — Table 3 the failure and 

how P5 surfaced it, Table 4 the fix and the anti-mandate it generalises to; the full seven are 

recorded in the project’s internal documentation. 

27 Bug  Failure (what the user hit)  How P5 surfaced it 

Confirmation loop  User picks “1” to approve a 

write; the agent re-asks; the 

loop never terminates 

The driving agent ap -

proving an assistant-cre -

ation through the num -

bered menu 

Jargon leak  Agent tells an educa -

tor  “the debug didn’t re -

turn useful pipeline out -

put… prompt_processor is 

simple_augment…” 

The driving agent role-

playing an educator asking 

why an assistant failed 

Internal fields in output  Agent shows  Group ID:  

> fed28308-…

(an internal in -

tegration id) to the educa -

tor 

The driving agent request -

ing assistant details and in -

specting the rendered out -

put 

Session resume shows in 

ternals 

Reopening the page ren -

ders  [System: Skill  

> startup]

as a user message 

The driving agent resum -

ing a stored session 

Table 3: four representative AAC bugs and how P5 surfaced them — a general-purpose agent 

driving the custom agent through realistic educator scenarios. 

Bug  Fix  Anti-mandate it teaches 

Confirmation loop  Replace numbered options 

with explicit  (y)es / (n)o 

The LLM’s output format 

and the host parser’s ex -

pected input are one con -

tract — do not let them drift 

Jargon leak  An explicit  negative  vo -

cabulary in the system 

prompt (name the forbid -

den words) 

Positive instructions (“use 

simple language”) are 

weaker than a named neg -

ative list — do not rely on 

them for vocabulary con -

trol 

Internal fields in output  System-prompt rule list -

ing which fields to hide 

vs. show 

Do not pass tool results to 

the user unfiltered — the 

model’s instinct is to dis -

play everything it receives 

28 Bug  Fix  Anti-mandate it teaches 

Session resume shows in 

ternals 

Frontend filter: hide mes -

sages whose content starts 

with  [System: 

The stored (LLM) conver -

sation and the displayed 

(user) conversation are dif -

ferent conversations — do 

not conflate them 

Table 4: the fix and the anti-mandate each bug in Table 3 generalises to. 

The pattern across all seven is the methodology’s central  encode-where-it-belongs  rule: crit -

ical constraints go in host code (deterministic), behavioural guidance goes in the system 

prompt, and a prompt rule that keeps being violated is promoted to a code rule. Tellingly, 

every one of the seven was a naming, format, vocabulary, or display defect at the human– 

system interface — not one was a crash or a timeout. That is precisely the behavioural 

surface classical testing does not exercise and P5 does. 

The discipline did not stay with the build. In production, a principal use of the deployed 

AAC is exactly the testing move P5 names: educators use it to  automatically generate test 

sets for an assistant, then execute and evaluate them  — and at UPC nearly half of the 

~150 creator-users now build tests this way. Agent-assisted behavioural testing is thus not 

only  how the AAC was built ; it is a feature that non-engineers use, at scale, on their own 

assistants. The methodology’s testing posture has transferred from the engineer to the end 

user — which is the strongest evidence we can offer that the posture is usable rather than 

merely advocated. 

The AAC’s diagnostic value for the paper: it was built with the right discipline by intuition; 

the methodology makes the intuition explicit. A reader following the methodology arrives 

at the AAC’s shape on purpose, not by accident. 

6.1 Transfer beyond the AAC — agents building agents 

The AAC is a single case built by the methodology’s own originators, which is exactly the 

limitation a reviewer should press (and §7.5 concedes). The methodology’s first test  outside 

that team is now under way, and it happens to be the recursion the title names. A developer 

who did not build the AAC was trained in the methodology and applied it to a different 

LAMB subproject: a Moodle-CLI integration and a rubric-based evaluation agent, built on 

the published proof-of-concept for generative-AI-assisted rubric evaluation in software-

engineering coursework [García-Peñalvo et al. 2026]. Following the methodology, that 

developer produced a CLI agent that does two things — it  applies  the methodology, and it 

builds further agents : evaluation agents that run complex extract  → analyse  → synthesise 

rubric assessments, generated for new domains. The agent-generated evaluators were 

validated against the original Python-plus-LLM pipeline on matched inputs, comparing 

final assessments. 

29 This is  agents all the way down  in the literal, operational sense — an agent built under the 

methodology building the next layer of agents — and it is, equally, the methodology’s 

transferability evidence : the practice was reproduced, and extended, by someone other 

than its authors, which is a different and stronger claim than “the authors applied their 

own method successfully.” We report it as  in progress : the work is pending publication and 

will be defended as an undergraduate final project (TFG) in late June 2026, with the report 

to follow. We therefore present it as forthcoming corroboration rather than a completed 

study, and flag it as such in §7.5. The same transfer pattern is being widened deliberately: 

a cohort on a Barcelona Supercomputing Center course (June–July 2026) will be the next, 

larger test of whether trained practitioners reproduce the results. 

# 7. Discussion 

7.1 Frameworks remain the right choice — sometimes 

The methodology does not argue against frameworks. It argues against  adopting a frame 

work before P1 and P2 are in the engineer’s hands . Once the substrate and building 

blocks are internalised, a framework is one of several engineering tools the practitioner 

can deploy with judgement. 

A framework remains the right choice when: 

• The problem formulation the framework encodes is genuinely the engineer’s problem 

formulation. (LangGraph’s typed StateGraph if orchestration genuinely needs typed 

shared state; AutoGen’s conversation patterns if agents genuinely converse rather than 

delegate.) 

• The team coordination cost of the unframed alternative exceeds the technical cost of the 

framework. A framework’s value is sometimes located in the team layer rather than the 

technical layer — the cost of onboarding, code review, and developer rotation drops 

when the team standardises on a known framework. 

• The cases identified in §5.4 — durable workflows, typed handoffs, streaming partials, 

recursion-depth control — where the framework writes plumbing the engineer would 

otherwise rebuild, and the engineering cost of reinventing it is unjustifiable. (Unified 

observability is the deliberate exception: §5.4 shows the hook building-block closes it 

cheaply, so a framework there buys turnkey rendering, not a missing capability.) 

The methodology’s claim is more modest than “frameworks are bad”. It is that frameworks 

teach the framework, not the principles. A framework adopted competently after the prin -

ciples are in hand is a different artifact than a framework adopted before. The methodology 

supports the first; it cautions against the second. 

7.2 Minimal dependencies as a security posture 

Recent supply-chain incidents make dependency risk a routine engineering concern rather 

than a purely hypothetical one. In 2024, the  xz -utils backdoor (CVE-2024-3094) [NVD 2024] 

30 demonstrated how a core dependency could be compromised upstream — with adver -

sarial maintainership concealed for an extended period before discovery. In 2026, PyPI 

documented package-supply-chain attacks affecting LiteLLM and Telnyx [PyPI 2026]. 

PyPI has also reported sustained malware volume and ongoing typosquatting defences 

[PyPI 2023]. These incidents do not prove that framework-heavy designs are always less 

secure, but they do strengthen the engineering case for understanding and minimising 

dependency closure where possible. 

A custom agent built on the methodology proposed here typically depends on: 

• One LLM-provider SDK (single package, audited by the provider). 

• Whatever the application’s existing dependencies are. 

• No agent framework. 

A custom agent built on a typical multi-framework agent stack (LLM orchestration 

framework + multi-agent framework + vector-database adapter + MCP client + evaluation 

framework) will typically pull in dozens of transitive dependencies. A direct empirical 

comparison is beyond this paper’s scope; a controlled study across roughly a dozen 

matched agents — measuring transitive dependency count, lockfile size, and known-

CVE exposure per stack — would be enough to settle it, and we flag it as future work 

(§7.4). The directional point is nonetheless sound:  each dependency introduces additional 

attack surface and maintenance obligations, so smaller dependency closures can reduce 

some classes of supply  chain risk , independent of any judgement about the framework’s 

correctness or its authors’ trustworthiness. 

We do not argue this as the primary reason to follow the methodology — the method -

ological reasons (substrate internalisation, agent-tests-agent as a discipline, the CLI 

orchestration corollary) are independent. We argue it as a  consequential  benefit: an agent 

built by the methodology proposed here has, by construction, a small dependency surface. 

In a 2026 threat environment where supply-chain attack is now a routine engineering 

assumption, this is a material design consideration. 

7.3 Memory and the build / deploy asymmetry 

The methodology presented in this paper covers building a custom agent. It does not cover 

what happens to that agent’s memory once the build is done. The omission is a scope 

choice; this section names it explicitly so the reader sees where the methodology ends and 

where future work begins. 

The methodology produces a class of artifact we call a  Turtle  — a custom agent whose 

memory exists only in the  messages[]  accumulated within a session, and whose tools, 

system prompt, skills, characters, and instruction set are frozen at deploy. A Turtle does not 

learn between sessions; whatever has been internalised by its design has been internalised 

in advance. 

31 The agent that  builds  the Turtle is a different class of artifact. We adopt the role-name 

Splinter  for it, following the same naming idiom as the Turtle pattern itself (§3.4) and the 

multi-agent topology of §5.2. A Splinter carries durable memory across sessions, evolves 

its form as the build proceeds, and has no fixed deploy moment. Concretely, a Splinter is 

whatever general-purpose orchestrator drives the engineer through P3 — Claude Code, 

OpenCode, or Cursor for an individual engineer; named long-running orchestrator agents 

for a team that maintains them across projects.  Different categories of artifact, not different 

gradations of the same thing. 

Across the P3  → P4  → P5 cycle, the Splinter stores, retrieves, and improves Turtle-relevant 

memories: what worked in the prototype, what scenarios surfaced behavioural defects in 

P5, what skill formulations the model misread, what voice and tone landed and what did 

not. At deploy, the Splinter hands the frozen state to the Turtle and steps out of the runtime. 

The learning happened during the cycle and got compiled into the Turtle’s deploy-time state.  The 

Turtle’s runtime is then deliberately memoryless across sessions — which is what makes 

its behaviour governable, observable, and testable under the P5 discipline. 

The recursion implied by the paper’s title surfaces here in a second sense.  Agents all the 

way down  is also  memory-asymmetry all the way down : at every level of agent composition, 

the agent doing the building carries durable memory; the agent being built carries session 

memory. The Splinter that helped build the Turtle is itself, in another setting, a Turtle that 

some prior Splinter — a developer guiding it, an orchestrator framework around it — 

once helped shape. The methodology’s recursion includes this asymmetry as a structural 

feature, not a coincidence of any particular implementation. 

This paper is therefore  the methodology for building a Turtle . A companion direction — left 

to future work — is  the methodology for building a Splinter : an agent whose memory is 

durable, whose form evolves across deployment, whose acceptance criteria, testing proto -

cols, and security posture all differ from a Turtle’s. That methodology is a separate paper, 

with separate engineering discipline. The contribution of this subsection to the present 

paper is the more modest one of naming the gap: a vocabulary item ( Turtle , Splinter ) and 

an explicit scope statement that says what this paper does and does not claim. 

7.4 Open empirical questions 

Three places where the methodology proposes claims that warrant systematic empirical 

work: 

1.  Depth  2 orchestration cost shape.  The §5.4 cracks list claims a sub-instance of a sub-

instance multiplies cold-cache prefixes. The systematic measurement — for which task 

sizes does fan-out pay off versus a single longer parent session — is open. 

2.  P5 backbone  comparison protocols.  The methodology claims that running the same 

P5 scenario suite against different LLM backbones yields apples-to-apples behavioural 

comparison. The protocol — how to control for non-determinism, how to weight 

32 per-scenario outcomes, how to detect cross-backbone behavioural drift — is method -

ologically open. 

3.  The minimal  dependencies / methodology  fidelity correlation.  The claim that agents 

built by the methodology are structurally simpler than framework equivalents is plau -

sible; a controlled comparison (dependency count, lines of agent-loop code, cache-hit 

rate under iteration) on matched use cases would convert plausibility into evidence. 

7.5 Threats to validity 

We state the main limitations plainly.  Single primary case study.  The methodology was 

crystallised from one build, the AAC; although it has since transferred to further LAMB 

subprojects (§6), the bulk of the reported evidence comes from a single project and 

team, so generalisation beyond it is argued rather than measured.  Domain.  That project 

sits in EdTech; the substrate, building-block, and testing claims are domain-independent 

in principle, but we have not demonstrated them on agents in, for example, fintech or 

healthcare with their distinct compliance surfaces.  No controlled comparison.  We do not 

compare teams that follow the methodology against teams that do not, nor framework-

free against framework-based builds on a matched task; the claims that the ordered phases 

and the iteration cycle yield better agents are reported as construction-period observations 

and practitioner judgement, not as controlled results.  Practitioner  sourced quantitative 

anchors.  The MCP-versus-CLI figures (§3.2) come from practitioner reports rather than 

peer-reviewed studies; we present them with their measurement conditions and ranges, 

and flag a controlled measurement as future work. These limitations set the agenda for the 

journal version of this work (§7.4). 

# 8. Conclusion 

We have proposed  Agents All the Way Down  — a methodology in five phases for 

building custom AI agents, from substrate internalisation through agent-tests-agent as 

a quality-assurance discipline. The methodology is lightweight (no required framework 

dependencies), comprehensive (covers substrate, building, prototyping, shipping, and 

testing), and independent (transferable across LLM providers, programming languages, 

and application domains). The corollary in §5 extends the methodology to multi-agent 

orchestration by recognising that the agent’s CLI shipping artifact (P4) is itself the orches -

tration interface. 

The methodology is the answer to a question the published literature has not framed 

cleanly:  what is the practice for building a custom agent, end to end, in 2026?  Existing publi -

cations give parts of the answer — substrate intuitions from Anthropic’s engineering 

writing; tool-use mechanics from Anthropic’s and OpenAI’s documentation; prototyping 

affordances from Claude Code and OpenCode; orchestration patterns from LangGraph 

and AutoGen; evaluation patterns from Reflexion and the eval-tooling community. To our 

knowledge, no published practice has chained these into one. 

33 The broader implication is for how software engineering treats agents at all. If a custom 

agent is a  living artifact  — its behavioural quality maintained by iteration against an 

evolving model substrate, never certified at a single point in time — then the disciplines 

that matter shift accordingly: from one-time acceptance toward continuous behavioural 

evaluation, from framework selection toward substrate fluency, from shipping a finished 

system toward maintaining a loop. P5 and the cycle of §4 are where that shift becomes 

concrete; the rest of the methodology exists to make the loop cheap enough to run in 

practice. This reframing — the agent as a maintained artifact rather than a delivered one 

— is, we think, the part most likely to outlast any specific tool named in this paper. 

We close with two disciplines this paper hands the reader to try on Monday morning: 

(i)  ship the agent as a CLI  — the simplest single change with the largest downstream 

effect, because it makes everything else in this methodology composable; and (ii)  drive 

the agent with another agent , in scenarios, against an evaluation rubric — the simplest 

single addition to a testing stack that classical software-engineering practice does not by 

itself provide. If those two disciplines are the only artifacts a reader takes from this paper, 

the reading was not wasted. 

# Data availability 

The methodology’s primary worked example, the AAC (Agent-Assisted Creator), is part 

of the open-source  LAMB  platform ( lamb-project.org ); the public repository includes the 

AAC agent. Teaching material that walks the methodology through worked examples is 

openly available as a video lecture series,  Learning LLMs, RAG, and Building Agents  [Alier 

2026]. The multi-agent observability layer discussed in §5.4 is released as an open example 

[Legati Workshop 2026]. 

# Acknowledgments 

The methodology was developed across the following collaborations and communities. 

We thank: 

• The wider  LAMB project  team at Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC) and Uni -

versidad del País Vasco / Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea (UPV/EHU) ( lamb-project.org )

— the engineering ground that crystallised the methodology before it had a name, and 

the colleagues and students who have carried the AAC into production deployment at 

two universities since April 2026. 

• Raimon Lapuente  for the collaboration that helped structure the methodology into 

formal teaching material. 

• The students and practitioners who engaged with early presentations of this material, 

whose questions and pushback sharpened the framing of P3–P4. 

• The open agent community — practitioner writing by Geoffrey Huntley (Ralph-loop 

framing), Simon Willison (sustained practitioner-grade documentation of the LLM 

34 tooling landscape), and the Claude Code and OpenCode teams for normalising the 

general-purpose code agent. 

• The Logo and constructionism tradition — Seymour Papert, the original Turtle, and the 

educational-computing lineage that gave the methodology’s mascot its name. 

# Appendix A — Acronyms and abbreviations 

This paper draws on agent-engineering, software-engineering, and security vocabularies 

that overlap unevenly. The table below collects the acronyms used in the body in one place. 

Inline expansions appear at first use. 

Acronym  Expansion  Context in this paper 

AAC  Agent-Assisted Creator  The custom agent that crys -

tallised the methodology; 

the worked example of §6. 

AI  artificial intelligence  The umbrella term; “AI 

agent” throughout. 

API  application programming 

interface 

Function-calling APIs, 

REST APIs, LLM-provider 

APIs. 

ASGI  Asynchronous Server 

Gateway Interface 

A Python web-server in -

terface; AAC uses an in-

process ASGI transport to 

call its own API (§6). 

arXiv  (proper noun)  The preprint server; not an 

acronym. 

CI/CD  continuous integration /

continuous deployment 

Standard software-deliv -

ery terminology used in 

the worked-example list of 

§1.2. 

CLI  command-line interface  Either a packaged CLI bi -

nary (gh , gws ) or a CLI 

surface that an agent can 

drive; the  Turtle pattern 

(§3.4) ships agents as CLIs. 

CVE  Common Vulnerabilities 

and Exposures 

The vulnerability-identifier 

system; e.g. CVE-2024-3094 

in  xz  (§7.2). 

35 Acronym  Expansion  Context in this paper 

DSPy  (a framework name, not ex -

panded) 

One of several agent-con -

struction frameworks ref -

erenced in §2. 

GoF  Gang of Four  Informal shorthand for 

Gamma, Helm, Johnson 

and Vlissides, authors of 

Design Patterns  [Gamma et 

al. 1994]. 

HTTP  Hypertext Transfer Proto -

col 

Network protocol; “HTTP-

based transports” appear 

in the MCP authorisation 

discussion (§3.2). 

IEEE  Institute of Electrical and 

Electronics Engineers 

Publisher of  IEEE Software ;

the journal whose CFP is 

cited in §2.5. 

JSON  JavaScript Object Notation  Data interchange format; 

agent tool calls return 

JSON-shaped results. 

JSONL  JSON Lines  One JSON object per line; 

used as a streaming format 

for CLI inter-agent compo -

sition (§5.4). 

KV cache  Key-Value cache  Internal cache of LLM 

keys-and-values for the 

prompt prefix; central to 

the §3.1 cost discussion. 

LAMB  Learning Assistants Man -

ager and Builder 

The open-source educa -

tional AI platform the AAC 

was built for; in production 

at two universities since 

April 2026. 

LLM  large language model  The underlying model the 

agent drives. 

MCP  Model Context Protocol  Open standard for connect -

ing LLM applications to 

external tools and context 

36 Acronym  Expansion  Context in this paper 

[Anthropic 2024b; MCP 

2025]. 

NVD  National Vulnerability 

Database 

The U.S. government vul -

nerability registry; the 

CVE-2024-3094 advisory 

cited in §7.2 is housed 

there. 

OAuth  Open Authorization  Standard delegated-autho -

risation framework; the 

MCP authorisation discus -

sion (§3.2) cites OAuth-

over-MCP transport behav -

iour. 

PyPI  Python Package Index  The Python software repos -

itory; supply-chain inci -

dent records in §7.2. 

RAG  Retrieval-Augmented Gen -

eration 

A pattern in which an 

LLM is given retrieved-

document context before 

answering; appears in the 

§5.2 multi-agent role tax -

onomy (Donatello operates 

RAG pipelines). 

REST  Representational State 

Transfer 

Web-service architectural 

style; “REST API” usage 

throughout. 

SDK  software development kit  A provider-supplied li -

brary (e.g. the Anthropic 

SDK, the OpenAI SDK) 

used by the agent (§7.2). 

SE  software engineering  As in “classical SE test -

ing” (§3.5) or “agentic 

SE” (§2.5). 

STDIO  standard input/output  A local-process transport 

for MCP; treated sepa -

rately from HTTP trans -

37 Acronym  Expansion  Context in this paper 

ports under MCP authori -

sation (§3.2). 

UPC  Universitat Politècnica de 

Catalunya 

Marc Alier and María José 

Casañ Guerrero’s home in -

stitution. 

UPV/EHU  Universidad del País 

Vasco / Euskal Herriko 

Unibertsitatea 

Juanan Pereira’s home in -

stitution (Donostia–San Se -

bastián campus). 

URL  Uniform Resource Locator  Web address. 

USAL  Universidad de Salamanca  Francisco José García-

Peñalvo’s home institution. 

Methodology  specific terms  introduced in this paper (defined in the body where they first 

appear, listed here for reference): 

Term  Where defined  One-line gloss 

Liteshell  §3.2  An in-process facade that 

presents an application’s 

operations to the LLM as 

if they were a CLI; car -

ries the §3.2 CLI-token-ef -

ficiency win into cloud-na -

tive deployments. 

Hook  §3.2, §3.4  A deterministic host-side 

function that fires on 

a fixed point in the 

agent’s lifecycle (notably 

> pre-tool-use

); the enforce -

ment mechanism for the 

scaffolding’s security check 

— where the allow-list is 

actually applied (Listing 2). 

Turtle pattern  §3.4  The P4 deployment shape: 

the custom agent ships as a 

CLI tool with stable invoca -

tion, session resume, struc -

tured outputs, and  --help .

38 Term  Where defined  One-line gloss 

Turtle corollary  §5  Multi-agent orchestration 

as CLI composition, de -

rived from the Turtle pat -

tern. 

Agent  tests  agent  §3.5  The P5 discipline: a gen -

eral-purpose agent dri -

ves the custom agent 

through scenarios; be -

havioural-evaluation layer 

above classical SE testing. 

Substrate / Building 

blocks / Prototype / Har 

vest, fold, ship as CLI / 

Agent  tests  agent 

§3  The five phases. P1–P2 are 

preconditions; P3–P5 are 

the iterated practice (§4). 

Cabinet maker’s jig 

vs. carpenter’s bench saw 

§1.1  The fit-not-capability dis -

tinction between a custom 

agent and the general-pur -

pose tier. 

# References 

The references below are in author-year format suitable for markdown reading; the BibTeX 

equivalents are listed at the end of this section for the eventual arXiv / TeX submission. 

[Alier 2026] Alier, M.  Learning LLMs, RAG, and Building Agents.  YouTube lecture playlist, 

June 2026. https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLjRDvpoYVcO2eE3RYzZ9b2mWS1 

m6UxHCX. Accessed 2026-06-10. 

[Anomaly 2026] Anomaly.  OpenCode Documentation.  https://opencode.ai/docs/. Ac -

cessed 2026-05-22. 

[Anthropic 2024] Anthropic.  Building Effective AI Agents.  Anthropic Research, 19 December 

2024. https://www.anthropic.com/research/building-effective-agents 

[Anthropic 2024b] Anthropic.  Introducing the Model Context Protocol.  Anthropic News, 25 

November 2024. https://www.anthropic.com/news/model-context-protocol 

[Anthropic 2026a] Anthropic.  Claude Code.  https://www.anthropic.com/product/claude-

code. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[Anthropic 2026b] Anthropic.  Prompt caching.  https://platform.claude.com/docs/en/ 

build-with-claude/prompt-caching. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

39 [Anthropic 2026c] Anthropic.  Code execution with MCP: building more efficient AI 

agents.  https://www.anthropic.com/engineering/code-execution-with-mcp. Accessed 

2026-06-08. 

[Anthropic 2024c] Anthropic.  Introducing computer use, a new Claude 3.5 Sonnet, and Claude 

3.5 Haiku.  https://www.anthropic.com/news/3-5-models-and-computer-use. Published 

22 October 2024; Accessed 2026-05-23. (Computer Use exposes a  single execution surface 

— bash and computer tools — through which the model authors invocations; structural 

ancestor of the liteshell pattern in §3.2.) 

[Anthropic 2025] Anthropic.  Claude Skills.  https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-

code/skills. Accessed 2026-05-23. (The markdown-skill convention this paper uses to teach 

a liteshell’s invocation grammar; Anthropic’s published format.) 

[arXiv 2026] arXiv.  Submission Guidelines.  https://info.arxiv.org/help/submit/index.html. 

Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[CrewAI Inc. 2026] CrewAI Inc.  crewAI.  https://github.com/crewaiinc/crewai. GitHub 

repository, Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[Cursor 2026] Cursor.  Cursor Docs.  https://cursor.com/docs. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[DeepSeek 2026a] DeepSeek.  Models & Pricing.  https://api-docs.deepseek.com/quick_ 

start/pricing. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[DeepSeek 2026b] DeepSeek.  Context Caching.  https://api-docs.deepseek.com/guides/ 

kv_cache. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[Gamma et al. 1994] Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R., and Vlissides, J.  Design Patterns: 

Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software.  Addison-Wesley, 1994. (The Facade pattern 

and the lineage of  naming-as-contribution  the liteshell discussion in §3.2 borrows from.) 

[García-Peñalvo et al. 2026] García-Peñalvo, F. J., Alier, M., Vázquez-Ingelmo, A., García-

Holgado, A., Casañ, M. J., and Pereira, J.  Evaluación asistida por inteligencia artificial 

generativa en prácticas de Ingeniería de Software: una prueba de concepto.  RIED — Revista 

Iberoamericana de Educación a Distancia, 29(2), 2026. DOI: 10.5944/ried.47173. 

[Gauthier 2026] Gauthier, P. and the Aider contributors.  Aider Documentation.  https:// 

aider.chat/docs/. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[Google 2026a] Google.  Gemini Developer API pricing.  https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/ 

docs/pricing. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[Google 2026b] Google.  Context caching — Gemini API.  https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/ 

docs/caching. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[Hawking 1988] Hawking, S. W.  A Brief History of Time.  Bantam, 1988, p. 1. (The  turtles all the 

way down  image is attributed in this source to a lecture by Bertrand Russell; the underlying 

World Turtle  cosmology predates the modern attribution.) 

40 [HuggingFace 2024] HuggingFace.  SmolAgents — Tools-as-code agents.  https://github. 

com/huggingface/smolagents. Released 2024; Accessed 2026-05-23. (The single-execu -

tion-tool / tools-as-code pattern that lets the model author Python that dispatches into the 

engineer’s library; structural sibling of the liteshell pattern in §3.2.) 

[Huntley 2026] Huntley, G.  everything is a ralph loop.  Blog post, 17 January 2026. https:// 

ghuntley.com/loop/ 

[IEEE Software 2026] IEEE Computer Society.  Call for Papers: Engineering Agentic Systems. 

IEEE Software special issue. https://www.computer.org/digital-library/magazines/so/ 

cfp-engineering-agentic-systems. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[Inngest 2026] Inngest.  Inngest: durable workflow engine.  https://www.inngest.com/. Ac -

cessed 2026-06-07. 

[Khattab et al. 2023] Khattab, O. et al.  DSPy: Compiling Declarative Language Model Calls into 

Self-Improving Pipelines.  arXiv:2310.03714, 2023. 

[LAMB Project] Alier, M., Pereira, J., and contributors.  LAMB — Learning Assistants 

Manager and Builder.  https://lamb-project.org. Open-source educational AI platform; in 

production at two universities since 2026. 

[LangChain 2026] LangChain.  LangChain documentation.  https://docs.langchain.com/. 

Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[LangChain 2026b] LangChain.  LangGraph overview.  https://docs.langchain.com/oss/ 

python/langgraph/overview. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[Legati Workshop 2026] Alier, M.  The Legati Workshop — a scaffold for AI-augmented intel -

lectual workspaces.  GitHub repository. https://github.com/granludo/the-legati-workshop 

(multi-agent observability layer at  engineering-projects/legati-observatory/ ). Accessed 

2026-06-07. 

[Madaan et al. 2023] Madaan, A. et al.  Self-Refine: Iterative Refinement with Self-Feedback. 

arXiv:2303.17651, 2023. 

[MCP 2025] Model Context Protocol.  Specification, Version 2025-06-18.  https://modelconte 

xtprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[MCP 2026] Model Context Protocol.  Authorization.  https://modelcontextprotocol.io/ 

specification/draft/basic/authorization. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[MindStudio 2026] MindStudio.  MCP Servers Use 35× More Tokens Than CLI Tools — A 

Reliability Benchmark.  https://www.mindstudio.ai/blog/mcp-servers-35x-more-tokens-

cli-tools-reliability-benchmark. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[Nakajima 2023] Nakajima, Y.  BabyAGI.  GitHub repository, 2023. https://github.com/ 

yoheinakajima/babyagi. Accessed 2026-06-08. 

41 [NVD 2024] National Vulnerability Database.  CVE-2024-3094.  https://nvd.nist.gov/ 

vuln/detail/CVE-2024-3094. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[OpenAI 2022] OpenAI.  Introducing ChatGPT.  https://openai.com/index/chatgpt/. Pub -

lished November 2022; Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[OpenAI 2023] OpenAI.  Function calling and other API updates.  https://openai.com/index/ 

function-calling-and-other-api-updates/. Published 2023-06-13; Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[OpenAI 2026] OpenAI.  API Pricing.  https://openai.com/api/pricing/. Accessed 

2026-05-22. 

[Papert 1980] Papert, S.  Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas.  Basic Books, 

1980. 

[PyPI 2023] PyPI.  Inbound Malware Volume Report.  https://blog.pypi.org/posts/2023-09-

18-inbound-malware-reporting/. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[PyPI 2026] Larson, S. and Fiedler, M.  Incident Report: LiteLLM/Telnyx supply-chain attacks, 

with guidance.  PyPI Blog, 2 April 2026. https://blog.pypi.org/posts/2026-04-02-incident-

report-litellm-telnyx-supply-chain-attack/ 

[Reinhard 2026] Reinhard, J.  Why CLI Tools Are Beating MCP for AI Agents. 

https://jannikreinhard.com/2026/02/22/why-cli-tools-are-beating-mcp-for-ai-agents/. 

Published 2026-02-22; Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[Restate 2026] Restate.  Restate: durable execution for resilient applications.  https://restate. 

dev/. Accessed 2026-06-07. 

[Sapkota et al. 2025] Sapkota, R. et al.  AI Agents vs. Agentic AI: A Conceptual Taxonomy, 

Applications and Challenges.  arXiv:2505.10468, 2025. 

[Schick et al. 2023] Schick, T. et al.  Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use 

Tools.  arXiv:2302.04761, 2023. 

[Shinn et al. 2023] Shinn, N. et al.  Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement 

Learning.  arXiv:2303.11366, 2023. 

[Steinberger 2026] Steinberger, P.  OpenClaw: The Viral AI Agent that Broke the Internet. 

Lex Fridman Podcast #491, 2026. Transcript: https://lexfridman.com/peter-steinberger-

transcript. Accessed 2026-06-07. 

[Temporal 2026] Temporal Technologies.  Temporal: durable execution platform.  https:// 

temporal.io/. Accessed 2026-06-07. 

[Vensas 2026] Vensas.  MCP vs CLI: Cost Comparison for AI Agent Tooling.  https://vensas. 

de/en/blog/mcp-vs-cli-cost-comparison. Accessed 2026-05-22. 

[Wang et al. 2023] Wang, G. et al.  Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large 

Language Models.  arXiv:2305.16291, 2023. 

42 [Wang et al. 2023b] Wang, L. et al.  A Survey on Large Language Model based Autonomous 

Agents.  arXiv:2308.11432, 2023. 

[Wu et al. 2023] Wu, Q. et al.  AutoGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via Multi-Agent 

Conversation.  arXiv:2308.08155, 2023. 

[Xi et al. 2023] Xi, Z. et al.  The Rise and Potential of Large Language Model Based Agents: A 

Survey.  arXiv:2309.07864, 2023. 

[Yao et al. 2022] Yao, S. et al.  ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models. 

arXiv:2210.03629, 2022. 

43