Title: VeriTrace: Evolving Mental Models for Deep Research Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26081v1

Published Time: Tue, 26 May 2026 02:41:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 38

Markdown Content:
## VeriTrace: Evolving Mental Models for Deep Research Agents 

Haolang Zhao 1,∗ Yunbo Long 1,∗ Lukas Beckenbauer 1,2 Alexandra Brintrup 1,3†

> 1

Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge 

> 2

TUM School of Management, Technical University of Munich 

> 3

The Alan Turing Institute 

{hz496, yl892, ab702}@cam.ac.uk lukas.beckenbauer@tum.de  

> ∗Equal contribution. †Corresponding author.

Abstract 

Deep research agents face vast, interdependent, and pervasively uncertain information. Exist-ing systems explore what evolving intermedi-ate representations should look like, but leave their evolution to the LLM’s implicit reasoning. Without explicit regulation, the intermediate layer is easily contaminated by mixed-quality information and propagates errors along its de-pendencies, so model scale often ends up sub-stituting for absent regulation. We argue that an agent’s mental model should instead evolve through explicit feedback that continuously aligns task understanding with reality, and iden-tify three regulatory loops: interpretive update ,

deviation feedback , and schema revision . We realise this in VeriTrace , a cognitive-graph framework that explicitly implements the three loops. Using matched Qwen3.5-27B back-bones, VeriTrace improves over the strongest matched baseline by 4.22 pp on DeepResearch Bench (DRB) Insight (1.49 pp Overall) and by 5.9 pp Overall win rate on DeepConsult. With Config-DeepSeek, it achieves the strongest re-producible open-source result on DRB. 

1 Introduction 

Large language model (LLM) agents are increas-ingly used for long-horizon information explo-ration, such as synthesizing multi-source evidence for open-ended research questions (Du et al., 2025) and navigating scientific literature in autonomous research pipelines (Lu et al., 2026). Such tasks confront the agent with information that is both vo-luminous and structurally interdependent. Findings must be compacted for the agent to reason over, and dependencies among them must be preserved so that one concept’s findings can inform another’s inquiry. These pressures push deep research sys-tems beyond the LLM context window toward a persistent, structured intermediate layer. Recent deep research systems therefore exter-nalise intermediate research artefacts across search 

Figure 1: Regulated cognitive layer for DeepResearch. 

rounds. WebWeaver (Li et al., 2025b) co-evolves a dynamic outline with an evidence bank. Omni-Think (Xi et al., 2025) expands an information tree and distils a conceptual pool. FS-Researcher (Zhu et al., 2026) maintains todos and an acceptance checklist. These systems advance the question of what form an evolving intermediate layer should take, so that the agent can absorb as much knowl-edge as possible and organise future inquiry from it. But deep research is inherently uncertain and struc-turally interdependent. Without proper regulation, the intermediate layer is easily contaminated by mishandled, mixed-quality information, and prop-agates along dependencies to distort subsequent inquiry. We therefore address a different question. What regulatory loops can enable this intermedi-ate layer to adapt to such messiness and keep the system’s task understanding evolving in a healthy direction consistent with reality? We treat the intermediate layer as the agent’s mental model of the task. This mental model is neither the transient working memory of any single decision nor a stable long-term memory that does not fully participate in decisions; it is a dynamic representation of the agent’s current learning status, 

> arXiv:2605.26081v1 [cs.AI] 25 May 2026

evidence insights, and what remains uncertain. We identify three explicit feedback loops central to this regulation (Figure 1). The first is interpretive update . Each new find-ing is read against the model already in place. As rounds accumulate, the model develops a sharper sense of what each concept already covers and still needs. An incoming finding is no longer just ab-sorbed but classified as confirming, contradicting, gap-filling, or as a surprise outside the current fram-ing. The state actively shapes what counts as a usable observation rather than passively accumu-lating them all. Without interpretive update, the system is distracted by mixed and noisy findings, loses track of its current research state and can-not target the dimensions whose evidence would most improve task understanding. Our ablation in §5.2 confirms this. Removing this loop causes the system to terminate when its store appears full rather than when concepts are actually resolved, and to dispatch fewer follow-up searches even on under-resolved concepts. The second is deviation feedback . The plan-ner specifies what each concept expects from its next search. Each search outcome is then scored against these expectations, producing a signal that measures how far the actual evidence falls from what the planner assumed obtainable. The planner adjusts its search strategy according to this signal. Without deviation feedback, failure degenerates into undifferentiated retry rather than targeted cor-rection. Our ablation in §5.2 confirms this. Re-moving this loop inflates search volume without proportional quality gain. The third is schema revision . When accumu-lated feedback shows the current framing itself di-verges substantially from reality, the agent system-atically revises its understanding of each concept and the relations among them, which in turn re-shapes its plan. Otherwise the agent stays confined to its initial framing and cannot calibrate against evidence. Our ablation in §5.2 confirms this. Re-moving this loop noticeably degrades performance on harder, error-prone queries. These loops are designed in response to the spe-cific characteristics of deep research, not chosen arbitrarily. A system either implements them ex-plicitly or delegates them to implicit LLM reason-ing. The latter is a core reason deep research ap-pears scale-hungry: model scale ends up substitut-ing for missing regulatory loops, which is why FS-Researcher and EnterpriseDR drop substantially once the backbone is held fixed (Table 3). The separation of these loops also reflects cognitive-science accounts of self-regulation. Metacognition motivates interpretive update (Flavell, 1979; Nelson and Narens, 1990). Pre-dictive processing motivates deviation feedback (Clark, 2013; Hohwy, 2013). Assimilation and accommodation motivate schema revision (Piaget, 1952). We treat these as design vocabulary, not cognitive-equivalence claims. In VeriTrace, we instantiate the agent’s men-tal model as a cognitive graph (§3). Nodes are concepts under inquiry, edges are inquiry rela-tions among them, and each node stores accep-tance criteria, accumulated findings, and quality history. A cognitive graph manager interprets new observations against the current graph state and produces structured updates, realising interpre-tive update. A CR-AAP-inspired quality assessor (Blakeslee, 2004) measures the gap between ex-pected and observed evidence and routes the plan-ner to five search strategies, realising deviation feedback. When accumulated feedback shows the framing is wrong, five structural operations revise the agent’s frame of understanding, and subsequent search is reorganised to test and fill the revised structure, realising schema revision. We evaluate VeriTrace on DeepResearch Bench and DeepConsult. Under a controlled comparison with matched Qwen3.5-27B backbones, VeriTrace outperforms the strongest matched baseline by 4.22 percentage points (pp) on the Insight dimension of DeepResearch Bench (1.49 pp Overall) and by 5.9 pp Overall win rate on DeepConsult. With Config-DeepSeek, VeriTrace further achieves the strongest reproducible open-source result on Deep-Research Bench (Overall 55.77, Insight 59.56). Our contributions are threefold. (1) We identify three feedback loops as central regulatory mecha-nisms for an agent’s mental model under pervasive uncertainty. (2) We present VeriTrace, a cognitive-graph implementation organised around concepts rather than sub-tasks, with evidence preserved un-der structural revision. (3) Comprehensive experi-mental studies show that explicit regulatory loops improve deep research performance beyond back-bone scale alone. 

2 Related Work 

Knowledge structures in deep research systems. 

Deep research agents require intermediate artefacts that persist across search rounds and guide later search, filtering, and synthesis decisions. Exist-ing systems differ mainly in how they materialise these artefacts. Agents like WebThinker (Li et al., 2025a) rely on the LLM context window for im-plicit carry-over, while FS-Researcher (Zhu et al., 2026) drives search from todos and an acceptance checklist over a file-system store. More structured systems organise artefacts hierarchically, includ-ing WebWeaver’s co-evolving outline and evidence bank (Li et al., 2025b), OmniThink’s information tree and conceptual pool (Xi et al., 2025), and Mind2Report’s knowledge-enriched chapter tree (Cheng et al., 2026). Our focus is not which stor-age form best preserves intermediate artefacts, but what regulatory conditions allow the intermediate layer to improve its task understanding over long research trajectories. 

Cognitive-science framing. We use cogni-tive science as a design vocabulary rather than a claim of cognitive equivalence. Metacognition 

(Flavell, 1979) and the monitoring–control view of metamemory (Nelson and Narens, 1990) cast learn-ing as monitoring what one knows and adjusting inquiry accordingly, motivating interpretive update. 

Predictive processing (Clark, 2013; Hohwy, 2013) frames action as driven by expectation–observation mismatch, motivating deviation feedback. Piaget’s contrast between assimilation into existing struc-ture and accommodation of the structure itself (Pi-aget, 1952) motivates schema revision. 

Replanning versus reframing . A related line re-vises plans after detecting problems. EnterpriseDR (Prabhakar et al., 2025) reflects on gaps at the knowledge level to drive dynamic replanning, accu-mulating knowledge accordingly. Schema revision instead restructures the concept labels, their rela-tions, and the inquiry goals that together define how evidence insights are organised and where search goes next, and then reorganises search to fill and test the revised frame. Thus, a framing error is corrected, rather than diluted by accumulating knowledge within the wrong frame (§5.2). 

3 Method 

3.1 Overview 

VeriTrace centres the research loop on a cognitive graph (Figure 2). A planner reads a compiled view of the graph state (Appendix II) and issues structured actions, while parallel searchers gather evidence and a lightweight reader extracts find-ings with page-level quality scores. The cognitive graph manager then assimilates observations into the graph state (Appendix III). The loop alternates between assimilation and accommodation. Unre-solved edges trigger search, deviation feedback routes follow-up strategies (§3.4), and restructuring is invoked when accumulated feedback no longer fits the current frame of understanding (§3.5, §3.6). Once all nodes leave unknown and all edges are resolved, the writing pipeline produces the final re-port from the graph and evidence store (§3.7, with Appendix XVI giving a feature-level comparison against open-source baselines on the three loops). 

3.2 Cognitive Graph Definition 1 (Cognitive Graph) . A cognitive graph at time t is a tuple Gt = ( St, C t). The structural state St = ( Nt, E t, N user ) consists of a node set 

Nt, an edge set Et ⊆ Nt × Nt, and a protected subset Nuser ⊆ Nt (nodes for dimensions explicitly specified in the user’s question); the content state 

Ct = ( CNt , C Et ) consists of node content CNt =

{cti}ni∈Nt and edge content CEt = {ctij }eij ∈Et .

Definition 2 (Concept Node Content) . Each node 

ni ∈ Nt carries cti = ( ati, f ti , s ti, qti , T ti ): accep-tance criteria ati ∈ L that have not yet been satis-fied by current findings f ti , findings f ti (a set of atomic findings, monotonically accumulated on the regular update path), cognitive state sti ∈{UNKNOWN , PARTIAL , KNOWN }, quality profile 

qti = ( cr ti, aap ti) ∈ [1 , 5] 2, and associated task IDs 

T ti ⊆ N. Here L is the space of natural language descriptions. The cognitive state is determined by:                         

> sti=σ(ati, f ti) =
> 
> KNOWN acore ,t i⊆sat (fti)
> PARTIAL acore ,t i̸⊆sat (fti)∧fti̸=∅
> UNKNOWN fti=∅
> (1)

where acore ,t i is the core criteria subset at t and 

sat (f ti ) the criteria satisfied by current findings. 

σ is realised as a structured LLM judgment (Ap-pendix III). 

Definition 3 (Edge Content) . Each edge eij ∈ Et

carries ctij = ( gij , b tij , h tij , k tij , u tij ): inquiry goal 

gij ∈ L as the strategic question this edge inves-tigates, task-specific acceptance criteria btij ∈ L 

that break gij into checkable items for the most recent task on this edge, search history htij ∈ L ∗,attempt count ktij ∈ { 0, . . . , K } (K=3 ), and sta-tus utij taking one of to-solve , investigating , solved ,or exhausted .Figure 2: VeriTrace architecture. The cognitive graph coordinates regulated exploration and traceable synthesis. 

3.3 Content Evolution (Assimilation) 

At each search step, the planner selects an unre-solved edge eij from Gt and dispatches a search task (full task schema in Figure 10). For each task, the planner instantiates btij as concrete sub-criteria of gij , drawing on aj to target what node nj still owes. These criteria serve as the prior expectation 

that the searcher executes and the reader extracts and scores findings against. A searcher executes the task with access to the task specification and local context (the target node and its upstream neigh-bours, not the full graph); for each retrieved page, a reader extracts findings and computes per-page CR-AAP quality scores. The combined output forms the observation ot = ( ˆft, ˆqt), where ˆft are ex-tracted findings and ˆqt are quality scores. The cog-nitive graph manager then interprets ot through the lens of Gt, routing each finding to nj by default and to nk (k̸ = j) when it aligns with ak. This prior-guided interpretation is the core of assimila-tion. Each relevant finding is classified against btij 

and f tj as criterion-satisfying , redundant , contra-dictory , or unexpected , where unexpected requires both relevance to the user’s original question on 

nj ’s dimension and absence from every entry of 

btij . At task closure, entries of btij left unsatisfied by 

ot are retained in at+1  

> j

, so nj carries them across edges as residual criteria shaping its next task. The resulting update set Ut = {(j, ∆ctj )} thus contains nj by default and may span additional nodes:                      

> ∀(j, ∆ctj)∈ U t:
> 
> ft+1
> j=ftj⊕G∆ftj,
> qt+1
> j= agg( qtj,∆qtj),st+1
> j=σ(at+1
> j, f t+1
> j).
> (2)

Nodes not referenced in Ut retain their state. Equa-tion 2 realises interpretive update : ⊕G folds each classified finding into the node’s two-level find-ing structure ( item_findings or cross_item_findings )rather than a flat list, then recomputes st+1  

> j

=

σ(at+1  

> j

, f t+1  

> j

) so the system tracks how far each concept is resolved. Redundant findings are not re-added; contradictions are recorded in a per-criterion contradictions list preserving prior evi-dence; unexpected discoveries are routed to a dedi-cated channel. The latter two are surfaced as candi-date triggers for schema revision (Appendix III). When a search task for eij contributes findings to node nk (k̸ = j), the task identifier is registered in nk’s associated task set: T t+1  

> k

= T tk ∪ { task t}.This cross-node linkage is essential for the writing pipeline (§3.7). 

3.4 Deviation Detection and Strategy Selection Definition 4 (Deviation Signal) . Upon completing a search targeting node nj , the system computes a deviation signal in D ≜ [1 , 5] 2 × { 0, 1} × [1 , 4] :           

> δtj= cr tj,aap tj,ϕtj,ψtj
> ∈ D (3)

with content relevance cr ∈ [1 , 5] (evidence– need alignment), source credibility aap ∈ [1 , 5] 

(independent of relevance), accessibility barrier 

ϕ ∈ { 0, 1}, and unexpected-finding strength ψ ∈

[1 , 4] . The orthogonality of cr and aap enables dif-ferential diagnosis (Appendix VIII). 

The planner selects a search strategy through a mapping π : D → A search that partitions the devia-tion space into five regions. We define predicates ACCESSIBLE (δ) ≜ (ϕ = 0) , R EL (evant) (δ) ≜

(cr ≥ τh), C RED (ible) (δ) ≜ (aap ≥ τh), and UNEX (pected) (δ) ≜ (ψ ≥ τψ). The mapping is (evaluated in priority order):              

> π(δ) =
> 
> SUBSTITUTE ¬ACCESSIBLE EXPLOIT REL ∧CRED VERIFY REL ∧ ¬ CRED PIVOT ¬REL ∧UNEX EXPLORE otherwise (4)

exploit refines within the current source fam-ily; verify cross-checks against authoritative sources; substitute switches source type when blocked; pivot routes an unexpected finding to a new edge; explore broadens keywords or language. Threshold values and execution details are in Ap-pendix VI. 

3.5 Framework Evolution (Accommodation) 

When repeated strategy adaptations on an edge leave δtj in the same deviation region, or when contradictions accumulate across the graph, the planner concludes that the current framing itself is misaligned rather than merely under-informed, and proposes a restructuring operation Rk ∈ A struct 

that revises the frame of understanding (concept la-bels, relations, inquiry goals, and criteria), thereby influencing the planner’s future inquiry plans while preserving evidence under invariant I1 (§3.5):       

> St+1 =Rk(St, C t),Astruct =
> Rconc , R aug , R pivot ,Rprune , R correct
> 
> (5)

The equations below describe the semantic effect of each Rk on St; the concrete edits, including free symbols such as Eold , Ereorg , Nabs , and Nitem , are produced at execution time by a separate graph-manager component under a multi-phase safety protocol (Appendix IV). 

Local effects on nodes/edges:                                                 

> Rconc (ni) : Nt+1 =Nt∪ { ni1, . . . , n im},Et+1 =Et∪ { (ni, n ik)}mk=1 (6)
> Raug :Nt+1 =Nt∪ { nnew }, E t+1 =Et∪ { enew }(7)
> Rpivot :Nt+1 = ( Nt\Nabs )∪Nitem ,Et+1 = ( Et\Eold )∪Ereorg (8)
> Rprune (ni) : Nt+1 =Nt\{ ni}, E t+1 =Et\{ e∋ni},ni/∈Nuser , f ti=∅(9)

Cascading effect. When evidence at ni con-tradicts a premise on which downstream nodes were planned, Rcorrect targets the affected subgraph 

↓ ni ≜ {nj ∈ Nt | ni ; nj }. Inquiry plans (gkj , a j ) on ↓ ni are revised subject to I1 (§3.5):       

> Rcorrect (ni) : St↓ni7−→ S′
> t(10)

Structural invariants. Let Nuser denote the nodes corresponding to dimensions explicitly named in the user query. All Rk ∈ A struct satisfy:                   

> I1 (Immutable Past): ∀nj:ftj̸=∅ ⇒ ft+1
> j⊇ftj(11)
> I2 (Dim. Protection): Nuser ⊆Nt+1 (12)

I1 is enforced by append-only updates to f tj , with one documented exception for noise-item cleanup (Appendix IV). I2 is enforced as a veto condi-tion during execution: any proposal violating Nuser 

membership is rejected (Appendix IV). 

3.6 System Dynamics 

At each time step, the planner inspects Gt and de-cides between two mutually exclusive actions: dis-patching a search task (assimilation) or proposing a restructuring operation (accommodation). The two never co-occur within a single step:       

> Gt+1 =
> (  St,Γ( Gt, o t)search step
>  Rk(St, C t), C t
> restructuring step (13)

In the common case, the planner dispatches search tasks and the system assimilates observations into 

Ct. Deviation signals δtj accumulate over succes-sive search steps; the planner uses these to select search strategies (§3.4) and attempts to resolve de-viations through strategy adaptation. Only when accumulated signals indicate that the current frame itself is fundamentally wrong, the planner forgoes search and instead proposes a restructuring oper-ation, modifying St while leaving Ct unchanged. After restructuring, the system resumes assimila-tion on the updated topology. 

Termination. The search loop terminates at step 

T when:                

> ∀ni∈NT:sTi̸=UNKNOWN
> ∧∄eij ∈ET:uTij =TO -SOLVE

Nodes leave unknown only when the planner’s scheduling reaches their edges; topologically dis-tant nodes thus remain unknown until selected. A soft budget Tmax enforces termination if conver-gence is not reached (Appendix X). 3.7 Writing Pipeline 

Upon termination, the cognitive graph GT and an evidence store E jointly feed a three-layer writing pipeline. The evidence store accumulates struc-tured records extracted by readers throughout the search loop:        

> E=(m, v m, w m, ℓ m,src m,task m)Mm=1 (14)

where vm ∈ L is a verbatim quote from the source page, wm ∈ L is the reader’s finding summary, 

ℓm ∈ L is the acceptance criterion this finding addresses, src m is the source URL, and task m is the originating search task identifier. A single source page may produce multiple records. Records enter 

E without further LLM processing; this mechanical side-channel ensures citation traceability. Each node nk’s evidence subset Ek ⊆ E collects records whose task m ∈ T k. The pipeline narrows information and decision authority in lockstep (Ap-pendix IX): Outline planner : reads GT with find-ings f Tk ; outputs sections, each mapped to a node subset Vk ⊆ NT . Section planner (sequential): reads Vk’s findings, the index {(m, ℓ m) : m ∈S  

> nk∈Vk

Ek} (each ℓm already names an acceptance criterion of the section), and prior sections’ plans; produces insights bound to 2–5 evidence IDs. Sec-tion writer (sequential): receives insights with bound records from S  

> nk∈Vk

Ek unlocked; renders prose with [[ m]] citations. 

4 Experimental Setup 

4.1 Benchmarks 

We evaluate on DeepResearch Bench (Du et al., 2025), comprising 100 complex research queries in Chinese and English. It employs two evalua-tion frameworks: (1) RACE , which assesses report quality via four LLM-judged dimensions (Compre-hensiveness, Insight, Instruction Following, and Readability), scored relative to expert reference reports (0.5 = reference parity); and (2) FACT ,which measures citation reliability through Ef-fective Citations and Citation Accuracy. We ad-ditionally evaluate on DeepConsult (Lim et al., 2025), a 102-query pairwise benchmark judged by gemini-2.5-pro , to test cross-benchmark transfer; results are reported in Table 4. 

4.2 Baselines and Model Configuration 

We compare against two categories of sys-tems. Proprietary systems include Claude-DeepResearch, OpenAI-DeepResearch, Gemini-2.5-Pro-DeepResearch, Doubao-DeepResearch,                

> Config P/S Reader Writer
> Config-3B Q3.5-35B-A3B Q3.5-35B-A3B Q3.5-35B-A3B Config-27B Q3.5-27B Q3.5-35B-A3B Q3.5-27B Config-Plus Q3.5-Plus Q3.5-122B-A10B Q3.6-Plus Config-DeepSeek DSv4-Pro DSv4-Flash DSv4-Pro

Table 1: Q = Qwen, DSv4 = DeepSeek-V4. P/S = Plan-ner/Searcher. The Cognitive Graph Manager uses the P/S model in Qwen (Yang et al., 2025) configurations and the Reader’s model in Config-DeepSeek (DeepSeek-AI, 2026). PreFilter details are in Appendix VII. 

and Kimi-Researcher, with results cited from offi-cial leaderboards as their implementations are not publicly available. Open systems with disclosed methodology include LangChain Open Deep Re-search, EnterpriseDR, WebWeaver, RhinoInsight, and FS-Researcher, each evaluated under its best reported backbone. For the controlled comparison (Table 3), we further rerun the three systems with both released code and a published paper (Web-Weaver, EnterpriseDR, and FS-Researcher) under our shared Qwen3.5-27B configuration to isolate architectural contributions from model capability. The per-role model configurations used by Veri-Trace are shown in Table 1. 

5 Results 

5.1 Main Results 

Table 2 reports DeepResearch Bench performance. Within the Qwen family, VeriTrace remains close across three configurations, with Overall scores ranging from 51.96 to 53.50. Switching to a different open-source backbone family with Config-DeepSeek lifts Overall to 55.77, giving the strongest reproducible open-source result in the ta-ble. On the Insight dimension, Config-DeepSeek (59.56) and Config-Plus (57.08) achieve the best and second-best scores across all listed systems. To isolate architectural contributions from model capability, Table 3 compares systems under the shared Qwen3.5-27B backbone. VeriTrace achieves the highest Overall score (+1.49 pp over WebWeaver) and leads all baselines on two of the four RACE dimensions (Insight and Instruc-tion Following), with its largest margin on Insight (+4.22 pp over WebWeaver). To test if the architectural gain transfers be-yond DeepResearch Bench, we also evaluate on DeepConsult under the shared Qwen3.5-27B back-bone. As shown in Table 4, VeriTrace reaches 81.1% Overall win rate, +5.9 pp over the strongest matched baseline (WebWeaver, 75.2%), with higher average score and NWR. Per-dimension re-sults are reported in Appendix XVII. Method Comp. Insight Instr. Read. Overall Eff.c. C.acc.                                                                                                   

> Claude-DeepResearch (Anthropic, 2025) 45.34 42.79 47.58 44.66 45.00 ––OpenAI-DR (OpenAI, 2025) 46.46 43.73 49.39 47.22 46.45 39.79 75.01 Gemini-2.5-Pro-DR (Google, 2025) 49.51 49.45 50.12 50.00 49.71 165.34 78.30
> Doubao-DeepResearch (ByteDance, 2025) 44.84 40.56 47.95 44.69 44.34 52.62 52.86 Kimi-Researcher (Moonshot AI, 2025) 44.96 41.97 47.14 45.59 44.64 ––LangChain-Open-Deep-Research(GPT-5) (LangChain, Inc., 2023) 50.06 50.76 51.31 49.72 50.60 22.44 34.74 EnterpriseDR(Gemini-2.5-Pro) (Prabhakar et al., 2025) 49.70 51.24 50.52 50.61 50.62 –72.50 WebWeaver (Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct-2507) (Li et al., 2025b) 51.29 51.00 49.98 48.89 50.62 166.73 78.25 RhinoInsight(Gemini-2.5-Pro) (Lei et al., 2025) 50.51 51.45 51.72 50.00 50.92 ––FS-Researcher (Claude-Sonnet-4.5) (Zhu et al., 2026) 54.25 55.85 52.47 51.54 53.94 139.91 76.17 VeriTrace (Config-3B) 50.85 55.22 50.38 49.08 51.96 ––VeriTrace (Config-27B) 50.84 55.86 50.72 49.29 52.28 134.20 68.46 VeriTrace (Config-Plus) 52.84 57.08 51.65 49.61 53.50 ––VeriTrace (Config-DeepSeek) 56.28 59.56 52.24 51.98 55.77 235.66 73.28

Table 2: DeepResearch Bench performance. Bold and underline indicate best and second-best scores.                         

> System (Qwen3.5-27B) RACE Comp. Insight Instr. Read. Overall
> WebWeaver 51.75 51.64 49.22 49.17 50.79 FS-Researcher 47.83 47.05 48.74 49.37 48.03 Enterprise-DR 47.82 50.17 49.30 48.91 49.16 VeriTrace (Config-27B) 50.84 55.86 50.72 49.29 52.28

Table 3: Controlled RACE comparison: shared Qwen3.5-27B backbone, isolating architecture.                

> System Win% Avg. Score NWR
> Enterprise-DR 64.7 6.11 0.769 FS-Researcher 72.8 6.49 0.797 WebWeaver 75.2 6.81 0.859 VeriTrace 81.1 6.94 0.887

Table 4: DeepConsult Overall under Qwen3.5-27B (102 queries; judge: gemini-2.5-pro ). Avg. Score is 0–10 with 5 as tie; NWR is computed over non-tie outcomes. 

5.2 Ablation Study 

We design four ablations targeting the three loops from §1 and the topological substrate that schema revision operates on. A1 (deviation feedback ) re-moves the deviation signal δ and strategy selec-tor π, forcing the planner to decide search direc-tions from implicit reasoning over raw findings. A2 

(schema revision ) restricts Astruct to {Raug , R prune },the subset already available in existing systems. A3 

(interpretive update ) replaces ⊕G with naive text concatenation. A4 (topological substrate ) flattens the cognitive graph to a parallel list of dimensions, removing edges and hop distances. Afull stacks all four. Implementation details are in Appendix XI. 

Accommodation-sensitive subset. The base-line successfully applies Rconc /Rpivot /Rcorrect on 11 queries, forming a natural accommodation-sensitive subset (Table 6). On this subset, A2, A3, and A full cluster in the same severe range ( −4.75, 

−5.18, −4.78 pp), while A4 is markedly lighter (−2.52 pp). These two contrasts raise two ques-tions: why is A3 worse than A2, and why is A4 lighter than A2? 

Why A3 is worse than A2. A3 (no interpretive update) should not, in principle, be tied to schema                                         

> System Overall ∆W/L Srch. Succ.
> Full VeriTrace (baseline) 52.28 ——1.00 ×100/100
> −Deviation feedback (A1) 50.52 −1.65 20/66 1.31 ×86/100
> −Schema revision (A2) 51.28 −1.02 41/55 1.02 ×96/100
> −Interpretive update (A3) 50.75 −1.52 33/66 0.42 ×99/99
> −Graph topology (A4) 51.39 −0.89 43/56 1.18 ×99/99
> −All four (A full )49.80 −2.48 12/88 0.55 ×100/100

Table 5: Ablation on RACE Overall. ∆: matched per-query mean diff; W/L : wins/losses vs. Full; Srch. :search-call ratio; Succ. : queries finished within 90 min.                

> Ablation Accomm. ∆Other ∆
> A1 ( n=8 /78 )−0.71 pp −1.75 pp A2 ( n=10 /86 )−4.75 pp −0.59 pp A3 ( n=11 /88 )−5.18 pp −1.07 pp A4 ( n=11 /88 )−2.52 pp −0.69 pp Afull (n=11 /89 )−4.78 pp −2.20 pp

Table 6: Per-query ∆ (ablation − baseline) split by whether the baseline applied Rconc /Rpivot /Rcorrect suc-cessfully. A1 misses q2/q12 /q14 , A2 misses q6 (time-outs). 

revision. Yet traces show that A3 still triggers re-structuring operations, and on the accommodation-sensitive subset it falls further than A2, which di-rectly disables the R-operations. Without inter-pretive update maintaining a coherent state, the restructuring that does fire becomes a side effect rather than a correction. Interpretive update pro-vides the cognitive basis on which R-operations can make informed judgments; it is the precondi-tion for schema revision to act correctively at all. 

Why A4 is lighter than A2. A4 (flattened to a list) is in fact lighter on the accommodation-sensitive subset than A2 (graph with restricted R-operations). This is not evidence that lists outperform graphs: full VeriTrace still outperforms A4 overall (Ta-ble 5). The reason is specific: dependency-bearing topology better captures conceptual dependencies, but under long-horizon uncertainty small models misjudge such structures, and a single misjudg-ment cascades along dependencies, making the graph less fault-tolerant than a flat list. Paired with an adequate repair mechanism, this fault-tolerance penalty is removed and the graph’s in-herent advantage is restored. This sharpens what schema revision is for: the precondition that lets a dependency-bearing representation realise its ad-vantage on small models. 

Deviation feedback (A1). Removing the deviation signal δ raises search calls to 1.31 ×, drops suc-cess rate within budget to 86%, and lowers Overall by 1.65 pp—the largest single-ablation drop. The planner still perceives that information is missing but cannot identify the type of mismatch or select a matching escape strategy; it can only append ho-mogeneous searches until budget is exhausted. If implicit LLM judgment could substitute for δ, re-moving it should not simultaneously inflate search volume and depress quality. 

A3’s coverage beyond accommodation. Outside the accommodation-sensitive subset, A3 still loses 

1.07 pp on the remaining 88 queries, with search dispatch contracting to 0.42 ×. Combined with the analysis above, this indicates that interpretive up-date is not only the cognitive basis for restructuring but also the baseline maintenance mechanism for mental-model evolution as a whole: every query’s plan evolution depends on the coherent state that it sustains. This is the empirical grounding for treat-ing it as a foundational loop in §1 rather than a localised mechanism. 

Afull . Afull ’s search ratio of 0.55 × sits between A1 ( 1.31 ×) and A3 ( 0.42 ×), reflecting a mixture of two failure modes: it inherits A3’s contracted external search, partially offset by A1’s tendency to over-append. On the accommodation-sensitive subset, −4.78 pp matches the A2/A3 ceiling; on the remaining 89 queries, −2.20 pp reflects the compounded broad-coverage failure of interpretive update and deviation feedback. 

6 Discussion 

Insight consistency: how the loops drive the mental model toward reality. Insight measures the quality of integrative reasoning, and our exper-iments show this dimension does depend on rea-soning power (Table 2). Yet with small backbones, VeriTrace’s Insight still surpasses baselines that use Claude-Sonnet-4.5 and other frontier backbones. Reasoning power matters, but it is clearly not the only determinant of Insight, or this would not hap-pen. The difference lies not only in how strong the model is when it reasons, but in what it reasons over. Even a strong backbone, integrating over a mental model polluted by mixed information and noise, and misaligned in its frame, produces analysis built on distorted information. The three loops do not change single-pass reasoning; across the search process they give the agent three capacities: (1) critical learning, monitoring the current understand-ing to judge which new evidence the current frame needs and how to fold it in; (2) deviation awareness, typing each search deviation so the system can dis-tinguish a strategic failure from a framing failure; and (3) frame rebuilding, restructuring the frame once evidence shows it is wrong so it better holds incoming information. These three capacities let the agent maintain a fact-consistent mental model whose frame is not derailed, so that the final writ-ing and reasoning rest on fact-consistent logic and yield valuable judgments and recommendations. 

Scale and regulation create headroom along different axes. We do not claim that scale is unim-portant, or that regulation replaces scale, but that part of the apparent scale dependence in deep re-search stems from missing regulatory loops. Within VeriTrace, scaling the backbone yields modest Overall gains. Under a fixed backbone (Table 3), however, VeriTrace exceeds the strongest matched baseline by clear margins on both Overall and In-sight, and removing the regulatory loops (A full , Ta-ble 5) drops the system below that baseline; with other components held fixed, this excludes attribut-ing the gain to writer quality or prompt style. The same holds on Overall: VeriTrace produces the strongest reproducible open-source result in Ta-ble 2, exceeding several systems that use frontier closed-source backbones. 

7 Conclusion 

We presented VeriTrace, a cognitive-graph imple-mentation that regulates a deep research agent’s mental model through three feedback loops, namely interpretive update, deviation feedback, and schema revision, steering the model toward what reality supports rather than treating persistent artefacts as larger memory stores. Controlled com-parisons and ablations show that explicit regula-tory loops improve performance beyond backbone scale. More broadly, VeriTrace operationalises self-regulation as an executable mechanism rather than a cognitive-science metaphor, complementary to scaling. As agents take on longer-horizon, more un-certain tasks beyond deep research, we argue that the maturity of their self-regulation should become a primary lens for evaluating and diagnosing them. Limitations 

(1) Evaluation centres on DeepResearch Bench and DeepConsult; generalisability to other open-environment tasks such as web navigation, sci-entific discovery, and exploratory debugging re-mains to be validated. (2) Restructuring triggers are heuristic; we provide no formal optimality guaran-tees. (3) The cognitive graph is built from scratch per task with no cross-task transfer. (4) Experi-ments use a limited set of non-frontier Qwen and DeepSeek configurations; broader validation across additional model families remains future work. 

Ethical Considerations 

This work raises several considerations common to deep research agents. First, the system retrieves and quotes from public web sources; we limit re-use to bounded verbatim excerpts attached to source URLs, respect robots-exclusion directives, and do not circumvent paywalled or login-gated content. Second, automated open-domain retrieval is inherently exposed to low-quality and contested sources: although our framework attenuates this through source-quality scoring and explicit record-ing of cross-source contradictions, residual citation drift and framing bias from early retrievals can-not be eliminated, and outputs should be treated as agent-assisted drafts requiring human verification before use in high-stakes domains such as medicine, law, or finance. Third, deep research agents con-sume substantially more compute than single-shot completion; the design choices described in the pa-per bound but do not remove this overhead, and we encourage batched execution on shared hardware. Fourth, the benchmarks used contain no personal identifiers, but production deployments on user-supplied queries should adopt standard privacy-preserving practices. 

References 

Anthropic. 2025. Claude takes research to new places. Accessed: 2026-05-22. Sarah Blakeslee. 2004. The CRAAP test. LOEX Quar-terly , 31(3):6–7. ByteDance. 2025. Doubao: Ai assistant with deep re-search reports. App Store listing. Accessed: 2026-05-22. Mingyue Cheng and 1 others. 2026. Mind2report: A cognitive deep research agent for expert-level commercial report synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.04879 .Andy Clark. 2013. Whatever next? predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science. 

Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 36(3):181–204. DeepSeek-AI. 2026. Deepseek-v4: Towards highly efficient million-token context intelligence. Mingxuan Du, Benfeng Xu, Chiwei Zhu, Xiaorui Wang, and Zhendong Mao. 2025. Deepresearch bench: A comprehensive benchmark for deep research agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11763 .John H. Flavell. 1979. Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cognitive–developmental inquiry. American Psychologist , 34(10):906–911. Google. 2025. Deep research is now available on gemini 2.5 pro experimental. Accessed: 2026-05-22. Taicheng Guo, Xiuying Chen, Yaqi Wang, Ruidi Chang, Shichao Pei, Nitesh V. Chawla, Olaf Wiest, and Xi-angliang Zhang. 2024. Large language model based multi-agents: A survey of progress and challenges. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01680 .Jakob Hohwy. 2013. The Predictive Mind . Oxford University Press, Oxford. Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Ceyao Zhang, Jinlin Wang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, and 1 others. 2024. MetaGPT: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Yuxuan Huang, Yihang Chen, Haozheng Zhang, Kang Li, Huichi Zhou, Meng Fang, Linyi Yang, Xiaoguang Li, Lifeng Shang, Songcen Xu, and 1 others. 2025. Deep research agents: A systematic examination and roadmap. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18096 .LangChain, Inc. 2023. LangChain: Building applica-tions with LLMs through composability. Yu Lei, Shuzheng Si, Wei Wang, Yifei Wu, Gang Chen, Fanchao Qi, and Maosong Sun. 2025. Rhi-noinsight: Improving deep research through control mechanisms for model behavior and context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18743 .Guohao Li, Hasan Abed Al Kader Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. 2023. CAMEL: Communicative agents for “mind” explo-ration of large language model society. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Guanting Dong, Hongjin Qian, Yongkang Wu, Ji-Rong Wen, Yutao Zhu, and Zhicheng Dou. 2025a. Webthinker: Empowering large reasoning models with deep research capability. In NeurIPS .Zijian Li, Xin Guan, Bo Zhang, Shen Huang, Houquan Zhou, Shaopeng Lai, Ming Yan, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Jun Zhang, and Jingren Zhou. 2025b. Webweaver: Structuring web-scale evidence with dy-namic outlines for open-ended deep research. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.13312 .Abel Lim, Saahil Jain, Vincent Seng, and adamp. 2025. Deepconsult: A deep research benchmark for consulting / business queries. 

https://github.com/youdotcom-oss/ ydc-deep-research-evals .Yunbo Long, Yuhan Liu, and Liming Xu. 2026. Emo-mas: Emotion-aware multi-agent system for high-stakes edge-deployable negotiation with bayesian or-chestration. Preprint , arXiv:2604.07003. Yunbo Long, Yuhan Liu, Liming Xu, and Alexandra Brintrup. 2025. Emodebt: Bayesian-optimized emo-tional intelligence for strategic agent-to-agent debt recovery. Preprint , arXiv:2503.21080. Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Yutaro Ya-mada, Shengran Hu, Jakob Foerster, David Ha, and Jeff Clune. 2026. Towards end-to-end automation of ai research. Nature , 651(8107):914–919. Moonshot AI. 2025. Kimi-Researcher: End-to-end rl training for emerging agentic capabilities. Accessed: 2026-05-22. Thomas O. Nelson and Louis Narens. 1990. Metamem-ory: A theoretical framework and new findings. In 

Psychology of Learning and Motivation , volume 26, pages 125–173. Academic Press. OpenAI. 2025. Introducing deep re-search. https://openai.com/index/ introducing-deep-research/ . Accessed: 2026-05-22. Jean Piaget. 1952. The Origins of Intelligence in Chil-dren . International Universities Press. Akshara Prabhakar, Roshan Ram, Zixiang Chen, Silvio Savarese, Frank Wang, Caiming Xiong, Huan Wang, and Weiran Yao. 2025. Enterprise deep research: Steerable multi-agent deep research for enterprise analytics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.17797 .Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, and 1 others. 2024. Chatdev: Com-municative agents for software development. In Pro-ceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics .Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Shaokun Zhang, Erkang Zhu, Beibin Li, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, and Chi Wang. 2023. Autogen: En-abling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155 .Zekun Xi, Wenbiao Yin, Jizhan Fang, Jialong Wu, Run-nan Fang, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, Hua-jun Chen, and Ningyu Zhang. 2025. Omnithink: Ex-panding knowledge boundaries in machine writing through thinking. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 956–976. Annie Xie, Dylan Losey, Ryan Tolsma, Chelsea Finn, and Dorsa Sadigh. 2021. Learning latent representa-tions to influence multi-agent interaction. In Confer-ence on Robot Learning , pages 575–588. PMLR. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, and 1 others. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Chiwei Zhu, Benfeng Xu, Mingxuan Du, Shaohan Wang, Xiaorui Wang, Zhendong Mao, and Yongdong Zhang. 2026. FS-researcher: Test-time scaling for long-horizon research tasks with file-system-based agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.01566 .

I Background: LLM-Based Multi-Agent Decision Making 

LLM multi-agent systems. LLM multi-agent systems (LLM-MAS) coordinate role-specialised language-model agents through explicit protocols rather than a single end-to-end chain-of-thought. Cooperative frameworks such as AutoGen (Wu et al., 2023) and MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2024) show that exchanging structured artefacts between roles can outperform monolithic prompting on complex tasks. More broadly, recent LLM-agent studies have explored how agents can plan, communicate, and act over structured intermediate states, extend-ing language-model reasoning beyond purely tex-tual generation (Guo et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2024). Beyond cooperative task-solving, some work treats agent decisions as control over structured non-textual variables. For example, agent be-haviour can be parameterised by latent strategic states rather than only by natural-language instruc-tions (Xie et al., 2021). This perspective is related to VeriTrace’s use of an explicit cognitive graph, although our focus is evidence organisation rather than negotiation policy learning. Most current deep research agents (Du et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2025), however, are still driven by a single planner that calls tools sequentially and relies on the LLM context to integrate evi-dence across rounds. In high-stakes negotiation, Long et al. (2026) instead study Bayesian orchestra-tion over multiple agents, showing how explicit co-ordination mechanisms can support risk-sensitive decision-making. VeriTrace follows the broader principle of explicit coordination, but specialises it for verifiable research traces and evidence-state restructuring. 

Multi-agent decision formulation. We assume a small set of role-specialised agents—a planner, 

K parallel searchers, a reader, and a manager— that coordinate through a single shared, structured state rather than direct message passing among workers (Wu et al., 2023; Hong et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2024). At each step, only the planner makes high-level decisions, and these decisions are action-typed : the planner chooses between dispatching evidence-gathering actions and proposing opera-tions that revise the shared state itself. This fol-lows the planner/worker decomposition that has proven effective for long-horizon LLM-agent tasks (Li et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2024). Workers execute the dispatched actions independently; the manager folds their observations back into the shared state via a deterministic update operator. Related work has explored debt negotiation policies for multi-agent decision-making (Long et al., 2025). In con-trast, our setting uses structured shared states to support evidence verification rather than credit ne-gotiation. 

II Cognitive Graph Data Model 

Section 3.2 defines the cognitive graph abstractly as Gt = ( St, C t) over node and edge content. This appendix specifies the concrete fields each node and edge carries, since several method-level claims (cross-node routing in §3.3, axis rotation in §3.5, evidence linking in §3.7) depend on the layout be-low. 

Concept Node. A Concept node ni groups its fields into six slots: 

Identity & topology. A UUID id ; a human-readable name (placeholders such as “[sup-plier]” allowed before discovery); node_type ∈

{start , placeholder , discovered }; hop_distance 

(BFS layer from the user-question root); discov-ery_dependency (upstream node IDs whose find-ings must be known before this node’s edges be-come searchable). 

Constraints. type_constraint (e.g., “a com-pany”) and condition_constraints (a list of filtering predicates derived from the user query); these are static throughout a run. 

Acceptance criteria. Criteria attached to tasks targeting ni come in two priority classes: 

core_criteria (required for KNOWN ) and supple-mentary_criteria (feed the quality profile only). They accumulate on ni as ai in §3.3; the core-priority subset is acore  

> i

. The manager reconciles findings against both classes and stores the residues as core_pending and supplementary_pending (Ap-pendix III); the node flips to KNOWN when 

core_pending becomes empty. 

Findings (the items mechanism). Findings are stored as a two-level structure rather than a flat list. discovered_items is the set of concrete enti-ties found for this node (e.g., {Scale AI, Appen, . . . }); item_findings indexes per-item attributes ({Scale AI: {revenue_2024: “$1B [[3]]”, . . . }}); 

cross_item_findings stores patterns spanning items (e.g., {market_consolidation: “top three firms con-trol 60% [[1]]”}). The (item, attribute) decomposi-tion is what enables axis rotation by Rpivot (§3.5). 

Quality and deviation tracking. quality_profile 

aggregates per-page CR-AAP into the two means 

(cr tj , aap tj ) plus three categorical labels: find-ing_strength ∈ {strong , moderate , weak , none }(coverage of core_pending ); unexpected_strength 

(the categorical ψtj used by the strategy router; Appendix V); and accessibility_barriers , a list of barrier types ( paywall , login_required , re-quires_download , dynamic_load ). ϕtj in Defini-tion 4 is the indicator of this list being non-empty. 

Audit trail. contradictions (typed five-tuples; Appendix III); unexpected_discoveries (free-form, criterion-divergent findings from Reader Part B); 

temporal_notes (a single-string aggregation of time-sensitive context across the node’s findings, e.g., “Scale AI terminated June 2024; data as of Dec 2023”, distinct from the page-level tempo-ral_context emitted by the reader); related_tasks 

(the IDs of tasks whose findings touched this node, used by the writer to fetch the right evidence subset 

Ek); cited_refs (global ref indices appearing in the node’s findings). 

RelationEdge. An edge eij holds an in-quiry_goal (a self-contained search question), per-task acceptance criteria core_criteria and supple-mentary_criteria (instantiated per attempt as btij ), 

task_type ∈ {open , specified } with optional spec-ified_source when the user named one, an at-tempt_count ktij capped at K = 3 , and a state utij ∈{to-solve , investigating , solved , exhausted }. Each attempt appends a search_history entry (query, summary, planner feedback) so the planner can read past attempts before issuing a strategy choice. 

State machine. A node’s cognitive_state is deter-mined entirely by the assimilation update of §3.3: 

unknown when no task has touched it, partial once any finding is written, known once core_pending 

is empty. start is reserved for user-anchored enti-ties that bypass search. An edge’s state follows: 

to-solve until first dispatch, investigating between attempts, solved once acore  

> j

⊆ sat (f tj ), exhausted 

when ktij = K without convergence, at which point the planner is required to switch strategy or propose restructuring (§3.6). 

III Cognitive Graph Update Procedure 

The cognitive graph manager realises the operator Γ

of §3.3 once per completed search task. It performs four steps in sequence: extract discovered items from the searcher’s response, route each finding to the appropriate finding container, reconcile the findings against the task’s acceptance criteria, and 

branch divergent material into the contradiction, unexpected, or search-experience side channels. The procedure operates on the target node nj of edge eij and is driven by a single LLM call using the update prompt (Figure 11, item 3). 

Step 1: extract discovered items. A discovered item is an entity that directly answers the node’s inquiry goal: an organisation, product, system, or distinct option. The manager builds the discov-ered_items list from the searcher’s response, ex-cluding metadata that does not stand as a research target on its own (people names, dates, events, lo-cations, raw metrics). Rankings, top-N lists, and ordered enumerations discovered during search are stored as ordered arrays in cross_item_findings 

so that the ranking context survives subsequent rounds. 

Step 2: route findings by attribution. Every finding is routed by an attribution test. If the finding can be attributed to one specific entry of discovered_items, it enters item_findings as a per-item attribute keyed by the item name (e.g., 

{Scale AI: {market_position: ...}} ). Otherwise ,when it describes a pattern, trend, ranking, or in-sight that spans items, it enters cross_item_findings ,either as a single-sentence string or as an ordered ar-ray. Each value carries [[ m]] citations to the source records in E. Empty findings are also recorded: a confirmed negative result (e.g., “no public record of this partnership”) is itself a finding worth keep-ing, since it removes the criterion from pending for the planner. 

Step 3: reconcile against acceptance crite-ria. The manager compares the aggregate find-ings against the edge’s core_criteria and supple-mentary_criteria . The residue, i.e., criteria not yet covered by any finding, is written back as 

core_pending and supplementary_pending on nj .

The pending lists are residues, not copies : an empty core_pending is precisely the condition 

acore  

> j

⊆ sat (f tj ) that flips nj to known . Coverage is judged at the criterion level rather than by labelling each individual finding, since one criterion may re-quire several findings together (e.g., a market-share criterion may need both a total figure and per-firm shares before it counts as covered). 

Step 4: branch divergent material. Find-ings that fit neither item_findings nor 

cross_item_findings are routed into one of three side channels. 

Contradictions. When a new finding clashes with an existing one on the same criterion, the manager appends a struc-tured record to nj .contradictions with fields 

{criterion , old_claim , new_claim , resolution , kept },where resolution is a free-form rationale stating why one claim was retained (typically citing authority, recency, or source type) and kept 

∈ {old , new } records which claim survives in the active findings. The recorded contradictions are surfaced to the planner in the next round as candidate triggers for Rcorrect (§3.5). 

Unexpected discoveries. A finding is admitted to unexpected_discoveries only if (i) it would help address the dimension of the original question that the inquiry goal targets, and (ii) it lies completely outside every entry of the acceptance criteria. Both conditions must hold; condition (i) excludes off-topic noise, condition (ii) excludes Part-A material the reader simply forgot to attribute. Each entry is a one-sentence description with [[ m]] citations, ranked by contribution to the inquiry goal. 

Search experience. A separate channel records the inability to access information rather than the information itself. The manager populates 

search_experience from two sources only: access failures reported by the searcher (e.g., HTTP er-rors, CAPTCHA, timeout) and confirmed data ab-sence (the searched material verifiably does not exist or is not publicly available). The mutual-exclusion rule is explicit in the prompt: any find-ing that conveys actual information (even partial, dated, or tangential) belongs to item_findings or 

cross_item_findings , never to search_experience .The reader’s accessibility_notes (Appendix V) feed both search_experience and the node-level accessi-bility_barriers flag in quality_profile .

Cross-node routing. The default and overwhelm-ingly common case is a single entry on the planner-specified target node nj . The manager additionally admits an update on a different node nk (k̸ = j)when a finding satisfies one of nk’s own acceptance criteria in ak rather than nj ’s; the finding is written to nk, and the originating task is recorded in nk’s associated task set, T t+1  

> k

= T tk ∪ { task t}, so the writing pipeline can later trace which task supplied each node’s evidence. start nodes are immutable search anchors and are never included in cogni-tive_updates ; information about a start entity is recorded on the relevant exploration node instead. 

Planner view (compiler). The planner does not consume Gt directly. A graph compiler renders 

Gt into a Markdown planning context: per-node summaries (state, constraints, findings, quality profile, accessibility barriers, contradictions, re-cent unexpected discoveries) and per-edge sections grouped by status (solved, investigating, exhausted, to-solve), with search history shown for investi-gating edges. Verbatim evidence quotes are not included; the planner sees abstracted findings and quality signals only. This bounded rendering caps the planner’s prefill at O(|Vfrontier |) regardless of total graph size. An excerpt from query 14 after the first search task completes (translated for typographic clarity; structure preserved from the system’s Markdown rendering; emoji omitted and replaced by bracketed labels):                                                                             

> ## Current Cognitive Graph State **Structure type**: mixed ### Entity Nodes -[START] Math xQuantum crossover (e1, hop=0) -[KNOWN] Main research teams (e2, hop=1) -Discovered: MIT CTP-LI, Stanford QFARM, Waterloo IQC, ,→
> Oxford QG, ETH QIT, BIMSA, ... [17 total] -Cross-item insights: -geographic distribution [[5]][[12]] -math-tool innovation: Quon, ZX-calculus [[18]] ,→
> -Supplementary pending: team_size_and_history -Unexpected (2): -"BIMSA Quon language [[36]]" ... -Quality: CR=3.9 AAP=4.3 |finding=strong, unexpected=moderate ,→
> ### Resolved inquiry goals -e1 --has_main_teams--> e2 ### To-solve inquiry goals -e2 --research_directions--> [...] -e2 --funding_sources--> [...] -e2 --industry_partners--> [...]

IV Restructuring Operations and Safety Protocol 

Section 3.5 defines the abstract operator fam-ily Astruct = {Rconc , R aug , R pivot , R prune , R correct }.This appendix specifies (i) the two-stage architec-ture that realises these operators, (ii) the primitive edit alphabet they compile to, (iii) one concrete realisation example per operator, and (iv) the multi-phase safety protocol under which edits are applied. 

Two-stage architecture. The planner does not directly edit the graph. It emits an intent ρt =(k, rationale ) via PROPOSE _RESTRUCTURE , with 

k ∈ A struct naming the operator class and rationale 

a free-form justification grounded in δtj and the contradictions log. The cognitive graph manager then translates this intent into a concrete sequence over the primitive edit alphabet 

Σ = { ADD _NODE , ADD _EDGE ,

> REMOVE

_NODE , MODIFY _NODE ,

> MODIFY

_EDGE }.

(15) There is no explicit remove_edge . An edge is re-moved only as a side effect of REMOVE _NODE ,which deletes the node together with all of its inci-dent edges. Omitting a standalone edge deletion is deliberate: removing a node’s sole incoming edge would detach it from the user-question root, and Phase 2 reconnection would then restore reachabil-ity by re-adding a bridging edge, so a standalone edge deletion is cancelled by the architecture rather than realised. 

Operator semantics and example realisations. 

The five abstract operators each compile to a char-acteristic Σ-pattern. 

Rconc (concretisation). Triggered when a sin-gle concept node accumulates a list of discov-ered_items that downstream edges must investigate per-item. Realisation: m ADD _NODE for the chil-dren, m ADD _EDGE from the parent, and rerouting of any pre-existing downstream edges to the appro-priate child. Example. A node “Technology Routes” with discovered items {RL, end-to-end, modular, sim-to-real} expands into four child nodes, each inheriting the downstream “maturity assessment” edge. 

Raug (augmentation). Triggered when Part-B insights or contradictions reveal a question dimen-sion absent from the initial graph. Realisation: 

> ADD

_NODE (the new dimension) plus ADD _EDGE 

(wiring it into the relevant subgraph). A candidate dimension is admitted only if it materially helps an-swer the original question, not merely a tangential topic. 

Rpivot (axis rotation). Triggered when the cog-nitive graph contains an N ×M structure ( N items 

× M dimension nodes) but the searched evidence reveals that information co-locates by item, not by dimension: a single source per item covers all M

dimensions. Realisation: N ADD _NODE (one per item, with the M dimensions absorbed into the new node’s 

core_criteria ), N ADD _EDGE (parent to each item), and M REMOVE _NODE (the dimension nodes whose content has migrated). 

Example. “Semiconductor Product Lines” with downstream dimension nodes {tech advantages, market share, supply-chain risk} pivots into four product-line nodes (mobile / server / AI / memory chips), each with one inquiry that bundles all three dimensions; the dimension nodes are removed. Net effect: 4×3 = 12 tasks collapse to 4.

Rprune (pruning). Triggered when search has established that a future node is irrelevant to the original question. Realisation: REMOVE _NODE ,with cascading deletion of incident edges. The manager refuses the proposal if (a) the node is in 

Nuser (I2 ), (b) the node has non-empty findings 

f ti̸ = ∅ (I1 ), or (c) the rationale cites local search difficulty rather than structural irrelevance. 

Rcorrect (premise correction). Triggered when an open contradiction at ni invalidates a premise on which downstream nodes were constructed. Re-alisation: MODIFY _EDGE on each ekj for nj ∈↓ ni

(rewriting gkj ) and MODIFY _NODE on each af-fected nj (rewriting aj ). f tj is left untouched by these primitives, satisfying I1 .

Example. A node investigating firm X’s strat-egy reveals that X was acquired by Y in late 2024, contradicting the premise of independent operation on which several downstream nodes (X’s partner-ship pipeline, capital structure) were constructed. 

Rcorrect rewrites those downstream inquiry goals around X’s role within Y’s portfolio while preserv-ing the acquisition-discovery finding on ni.

Phase 1: surgical edit. The manager receives ρt,

St, and the protected sets ( Nuser and any node with 

f ti̸ = ∅), and emits a single Σ-sequence. Any RE -

> MOVE

_NODE targeting a node in Nuser is refused, enforcing I2 . On refusal, St+1 = St and the rejec-tion reason is returned to the planner. 

Phase 2: orphan reconnection. A Phase-1 edit may disconnect nodes from the user-question root by removing intermediate dimensions. The man-ager runs up to five reconnection rounds, each adding bridging edges to restore reachability while respecting the protected sets. If reachability is not restored within five rounds, the system rolls back to the snapshot eSt taken before Phase 1. 

Invariants in execution. I1 holds for the evi-dence stored in E, which has no deletion path. The cognitive-graph attribution layer ( f tj ) is also append-only under all primitives except one: MOD -

> IFY

_NODE admits a remove_items parameter that lets the planner discard the per-item attribution of a discovered entity it has reclassified as not a research target (e.g., a noise entry inadvertently recorded). The verbatim quotes in E are unaffected by this revision; only the (item, attribute) mapping in item_findings is removed. REMOVE _NODE re-quires f ti = ∅ for Rprune and is refused by Phase 1 on any node carrying findings; the remaining prim-itives only add. I2 holds because Phase 1 catches 

Nuser deletions before they commit. 

V Reader Output and Unexpected Findings 

The reader runs once per page selected by the searcher and produces two streams that feed dif-ferent downstream consumers. Part A populates 

f tj ; Part B populates the divergence signal ψtj used by the strategy router (§3.4). Splitting them pre-vents Part A’s prior expectations from filtering out genuinely unexpected content. 

Part A: criterion-aligned findings. For each en-try in the per-task acceptance criteria btij , the reader returns either a finding or marks it as a gap. A find-ing has three required fields: a one-sentence answer, a 200–500 character verbatim quote from the page, and the source URL. The verbatim quote is the load-bearing constraint: findings without an exact-string quote that supports the answer are dropped before they reach the manager. This is what makes each (answer, evidence) pair a citation-traceable record in the evidence store E (§3.7). A criterion is satisfied only when the evidence contains values that can be cited verbatim in a final report (numbers, named entities, dated facts), not merely metadata describing where data exists. 

Part B: divergence track. Independently of Part A, the reader is asked what the page reveals 

beyond btij . The output is a single field unex-pected_insights , a list of {label , insight , evidence }

entries. The prompt directs the reader to look for four kinds of content under this field: facts that contradict or nuance the planner’s assumptions, im-portant entities or relationships not asked about, timeline events that change the picture, and leads worth investigating further. These four are guid-ance for what counts as unexpected; they are not separate output fields. 

Defining “unexpected”. A Part-B insight quali-fies as unexpected only if both conditions hold: (i) it would help answer the dimension of the origi-nal question that this task targets, and (ii) it lies outside every entry of btij and every active entry of ak for the immediate neighbours of nj in Gt.Condition (i) is what distinguishes “unexpected” from “off-topic noise”; condition (ii) is what dis-tinguishes “unexpected” from Part A material the reader simply forgot to attribute. Failures of (i) are dropped; failures of (ii) are reclassified into Part A by the manager. 

From Part B to ψtj . The manager aggregates Part-B insights across all pages of the current task into a single ordinal ψtj ∈ {none , weak , moderate ,

strong }, scored from the joint volume and topical coherence of the insights (rather than from any sin-gle page). This ordinal is the categorical signal consumed by the U NEX predicate (Eq. 4); the [1,4] interval in Definition 4 is a linear projection used for notational uniformity with CR/AAP. The thresh-old τψ corresponds to “moderate or stronger” on this ordinal scale (Appendix VI). 

Accessibility notes. The reader also emits a bi-nary accessibility indicator ϕm ∈ {0, 1} with a reason tag for each page; the node-level flag 

ϕtj = max m ϕm is the third component of δtj .Detection rubric, exclusion rule from CR-AAP aggregation, and routing implications are in Ap-pendix VIII. 

VI Search Strategy Execution 

Section 3.4 defines the strategy router π : D → Asearch as a priority-ordered case mapping. This ap-pendix specifies (i) the threshold values that instan-tiate the predicates, (ii) the operational semantics of each branch, and (iii) the form of the planner’s next ADD _TASK call once a strategy is chosen. 

Thresholds. τh = 3.5 (mid-Likert, between “adequate” and “good”) instantiates both REL 

and CRED . τψ corresponds to “moderate or stronger” on the four-level unexpected_strength 

ordinal (Appendix V). ACCESSIBLE (δ) ≡

(|accessibility_barriers | = 0) uses the indicator 

ϕtj directly. An auxiliary low-quality threshold 

τl = 2.5 governs structural escalation: when cr tj < τ l and aap tj < τ l, the manager raises a quality-gap signal that the planner consumes as input to 

Astruct (§3.5). 

Branch semantics. exploit (R EL ∧ CRED ). The current source family is delivering. The next 

> ADD

_TASK keeps source type and language fixed and narrows the inquiry goal to a sub-criterion of 

acore  

> j

that the prior pages partially answered, typi-cally a deeper attribute of an item already in dis-covered_items .

verify ( REL ∧ ¬ CRED ). Content fits but author-ity is weak. The next ADD _TASK targets the same criterion in a different source family (primary docu-ments over news, peer-reviewed over blog, official over secondary). One successful cross-source at-tempt is sufficient; over-verification is explicitly discouraged. If a prior verify on the same edge also yielded aap < τ h, the planner accepts high-CR sources and triangulates by source count instead, since the domain’s authority ceiling is intrinsically low. 

substitute (¬ACCESSIBLE ). Data exists but is gated. The next ADD _TASK relaxes both source type and authority: paywalled paper → press re-lease; closed site → open mirror; native document 

→ analyst summary. The planner is instructed to suggest source directions (e.g., “industry-analysis blogs”, “news deep-dives”) rather than lock to a specific URL. 

pivot (¬REL ∧ UNEX ). The original direction is barren but Part B uncovered something topical. The planner reads unexpected_discoveries , picks one entry, and either (a) creates a new task on the same edge with the goal rewritten around the unex-pected angle, or (b) creates a new edge to a fresh node when the discovery names a distinct entity. Case (b) is the typical mechanism for in-search graph growth. 

explore (default). Neither content fits nor a clear pivot exists; the landscape is undermapped. The next ADD _TASK broadens keywords, swaps query language (English ↔ Chinese; up to three lan-guages on multilingual queries), and falls back to broader engines. The planner is explicitly in-structed to map the landscape, not guess a new direction; guessing is reserved for pivot , which has unexpected discoveries to ground it. 

Re-evaluation cadence. π(δtj ) is recomputed at the close of each task on eij . The strategy is therefore not a one-shot routing decision but the planner’s running diagnosis. Edges that reach 

kij = K without ever escaping the same devi-ation region (e.g., three consecutive explore at-tempts that all yield cr < τ h) are exactly the structurally-misaligned edges that trigger Astruct 

proposals (§3.5). 

VII PreFilter Stage 

Role. PreFilter is a lightweight pre-screening stage that performs a binary classification on each raw search-engine result (title + snippet) before any full-page reading: read (send to the Reader for verbatim extraction) or skip (off-topic or dupli-cate). The classification is intentionally conserva-tive: when unsure, the prompt instructs the model to classify as read , so PreFilter only prunes obvi-ously irrelevant or redundant pages rather than act-ing as a relevance scorer. This keeps the Reader’s context window from being saturated by clearly off-topic hits while preserving recall on borderline cases. 

Per-configuration assignment. PreFilter is de-liberately assigned a lighter model than the Reader, since binary classification on title + snippet does not require deep reasoning (Table 7).             

> Config PreFilter Reader
> Config-3B Q3.5-35B-A3B Q3.5-35B-A3B Config-27B Q3.5-35B-A3B Q3.5-35B-A3B Config-Plus Q3.5-35B-A3B Q3.5-122B-A10B Config-DeepSeek DSv4-Flash DSv4-Flash
> Table 7: PreFilter and Reader model assignments. In three configurations, PreFilter shares the Reader’s lightweight backbone; in Config-Plus, PreFilter is dropped to Q3.5-35B-A3B while the Reader uses the heavier Q3.5-122B-A10B for cost efficiency.

Why a lightweight model suffices. Running Pre-Filter on a small, parallel-batched LLM sharply reduces the number of expensive read operations downstream: in Config-Plus, the Reader pro-cesses only ∼148 pages per query against ∼580 

search hits returned (a ∼74% reduction; cf. Ap-pendix XIV), leaving the Reader free to spend its full token budget on the read subset. The Reader still performs the load-bearing verbatim-quote check on every page it sees (Appendix V), so PreFilter’s conservative bias does not propagate downstream errors. The full PreFilter prompt is reproduced as Agent 5 in Appendix XVIII. 

VIII Reader Scoring Mechanism 

CR-AAP (Blakeslee, 2004) supplies two orthogo-nal evidence-quality axes that we use to instantiate the page-level scores feeding both the node profile 

qtj (Definition 2) and the relevance/credibility com-ponents of the deviation signal δtj (Definition 4). This appendix specifies the Reader’s per-page scor-ing rubric, the page-to-node aggregation, and the categorical strength labels that the strategy router consumes. 

Per-page Likert ratings. For each retrieved page 

m, the Reader produces five ratings in {1, . . . , 5}

from anchored rubrics (Table 8): currency cm, rele-vance rm, authority αm, accuracy βm, and purpose 

ρm. Anchors are explicit at both ends: score 5

requires the conditions in Table 8; score 1 is the in-verse condition (out-of-date, off-topic, anonymous, unsourced, promotional). Intermediate scores de-grade in the Reader’s prompt with explicit bound-ary descriptions for each step rather than leaving the midpoint unspecified. 

Obtained vs. exists. The relevance dimension carries a load-bearing constraint that distinguishes data the Reader extracted from data the page merely describes . A page that says “this platform provides 10 years of market data” but does not ex-pose the values themselves is rated rm ≤ 2, regard-less of how relevant the topic is. The operational test in the prompt is: can the findings on this page be cited directly in a final report? If the answer is no, namely data behind a paywall, download, login, or dynamic load that the Reader could not bypass, then that information is recorded in accessi-bility_notes (Appendix V) and explicitly excluded from rm. This prevents a structural failure mode in which evidence appears high-authority and on-Symbol Dimension Score 5 (anchor high) Score 1 (anchor low)                             

> cmCurrency Within target temporal window (e.g.,
> ≤6months for time-sensitive queries; matched period for historical queries). Wrong era; likely invalid due to age.
> rmRelevance Findings directly substantiate one or more core criteria with citable values (numbers, dates, named entities); usable verbatim in a final report. No substantive connection, or key data exists only behind an inaccessible barrier (routed to accessibility_notes ).
> αmAuthority Primary source, peer-reviewed venue, of-ficial organisational publication, or recog-nised expert author. Anonymous, unattributable, or self-published with no editorial gate.
> βmAccuracy Claims verifiable, upstream citations present, no factual errors against the cognitive graph. Unsupported assertions; sensational or con-tradicting known facts.
> ρmPurpose Educational or analytical intent; objective tone; no commercial interest. Agenda-driven; misleading framing; undis-closed conflicts.

Table 8: Per-page CR-AAP rubric used by the Reader. Both ends of each dimension are anchored; intermediate scores degrade with prompt-specified boundaries between adjacent levels. The five raw ratings combine into the page-level composites cr m, aap m via Eq. 16–17. 

topic on paper but is not actually available for the writer to cite. 

Composites. The two page-level composites are weighted sums cr m = 0 .30 cm + 0 .70 rm, (16) aap m = 0 .40 αm + 0 .35 βm + 0 .25 ρm, (17) so cr m, aap m ∈ [1 , 5] . The relative weight wcr  

> R

=0.70 encodes that, for research-style queries, con-tent alignment dominates recency when the two compete; the descending waap entries reflect that authority carries more signal than internal accu-racy or rhetorical purpose for the long-tail sources typical of low-visibility research. 

Page-to-node aggregation. Let P tj denote the page set retrieved on nj up to time t, capped at 

|P tj | ≤ 50 by the rolling window of Appendix III. The node-level entries of qtj = ( cr tj , aap tj ) are per-page means:           

> cr tj=1
> |Ptj|
> X
> m∈Ptj
> cr m,
> aap tj=1
> |Ptj|
> X
> m∈Ptj
> aap m.

The means feed the REL and CRED predicates of the strategy router (Eq. 4); per-axis minima are tracked alongside qtj to surface a single weak page in an otherwise strong batch as a quality-gap signal. 

Categorical strength labels. Two ordinal labels on qtj are produced by the cognitive graph manager (not the Reader) at task closure, summarising the entire batch of findings on nj :• finding_strength ∈ {none , weak , moderate ,

strong } rates the substantive coverage of nj ’s pending criteria across the task’s pages: multi-ple core criteria answered with cited evidence is strong ; thin evidence with major gaps is 

weak .• unexpected_strength (the categorical ψtj used by Eq. 4) rates the joint volume and topical co-herence of Part-B insights aggregated across all pages of the task (Appendix V): discover-ies that open a plausible new direction rele-vant to the original question are strong ; minor observations are weak .These ordinals are LLM-judged at the batch level rather than thresholded from per-page scores, be-cause both “substantive coverage” and “coherent unexpected angle” are properties of the finding set as a whole, not of any single page. 

Accessibility detection. For each retrieved page 

m, the Reader emits a binary indicator ϕm ∈ { 0, 1}

together with one of four reason tags ( paywall , lo-gin_required , requires_download , dynamic_load ). Detection is prompt-based , not based on HTTP sta-tus: the Reader infers the barrier from page text such as “log in to view”, “subscription required”, or “download the full dataset”. HTTP-level de-tection would miss a substantial fraction of bar-riers, since many gated pages return 200 with a teaser body. Inaccessible pages contribute only ϕm

and the reason tag, and are excluded from Eq. 16– 17 so that an inaccessible page cannot drag down the per-page composites of accessible pages in the same batch. The node-level flag is the disjunction ϕtj = max m∈P tj ϕm, and the third component of 

δtj in Definition 4; whenever ϕtj = 1 , the strategy router routes the next attempt on eij to substitute 

(Eq. 4). 

Why orthogonality matters. The two CR-AAP axes are scored and aggregated independently. This is what enables differential diagnosis at the strategy router: a high-authority but off-topic source reports as (cr tj < τ h, aap tj ≥ τh) and routes to explore ,whereas a topic-aligned but uncredible source re-ports as (cr tj ≥ τh, aap tj < τ h) and routes to verify .Collapsing the two axes into a scalar quality score would render these two cases indistinguishable and force the planner back onto undifferentiated retry. 

IX Writing Pipeline 

The three-layer writing pipeline (§3.7) consumes the terminal cognitive graph GT and the evidence store E and produces the final report through three LLM stages whose information access narrows in lockstep with their decision authority. This ap-pendix specifies the input, output, and information boundary of each layer, and the two safeguards that make citations traceable. 

Layer 1 — outline planner. A single LLM call reads the cognitive graph (root anchor nodes without findings are skipped) together with an 

evidence-availability index that lists, per node, the distinct m values present in E together with each record’s criterion tag. It produces a structured outline whose top level captures the overall theme and an enumeration of user require-ments, and whose section list contains entries 

(section_id , title , description , answers_aspect , V k),where Vk is the relevant_node_ids subset whose findings the section covers and answers_aspect 

records which aspect of the original user question the section answers. The availability index is what prevents proposing sections backed by too-thin evidence: if no node in a candidate Vk carries enough records, the section is dropped at this layer rather than padded with prose later. 

Layer 2 — section planner. S section planners run sequentially, one per section. Each planner sees only the findings of its bound subgraph Vk, an evidence index restricted to that section {(m, ℓ m) : 

m ∈ S  

> nk∈Vk

Ek} (each ℓm already names an ac-ceptance criterion of the section), and the already-completed plans of earlier-numbered sections (with their [[ m]] markers stripped, so prior citations can-not leak as inputs). Crucially, the planner does 

not see the verbatim quotes vm at this layer, only the index. The sequential ordering is what enables cross-section deduplication: each section’s prompt instructs the planner to skip any insight semanti-cally subsumed by a prior section. Its output is a list of insights with bound evidence : each insight is a tuple (claim , I, hint ) where I ⊆ E k, |I| ∈ [2 , 5] ,and hint is an optional presentation_hint ∈ {table ,

list , comparison , narrative } that the writer may consult. 

Layer 3 — section writer. S section writers run sequentially. Each writer receives the section spec, the planned insights with their bound evidence IDs, and the verbatim quotes vm for those IDs only; all other records in E are filtered out before the prompt is constructed. The writer also receives a tail of the previously written sections for narrative continuity, capped by a configurable character budget (default 

15 ,000 characters; per-language ceilings of 20 ,000 

for Chinese and 40 ,000 for English when raised); the citation markers in that tail are stripped, so the writer cannot re-cite evidence from earlier sec-tions. The writer renders prose with [[ m]] markers anchored to the bound evidence IDs. 

Two citation safeguards. The pipeline guards against citation drift at two layers. Information boundary: the writer’s evidence input is restricted to the section’s bound subset, so [[ m]] values for records outside that subset are unavailable at gen-eration time. Post-filter: after generation, a deter-ministic regex filter strips any [[ m]] whose m is not in S 

> (c, I)∈plan k

I, logging each removal for audit. The information boundary is the primary defence; the post-filter catches the rare case where a writer hallucinates a marker outside the visible set. 

Evidence store insertion. E is populated incre-mentally during the search loop, not at write time. Each reader output yields one or more records; two transformations are applied at insertion. Local-to-global remapping translates each reader’s per-page index into the global m-space used by the writer, so the same source page cited in different tasks receives a single canonical m. URL deduplication 

collapses multiple records sharing the same src m

into one entry while preserving the criterion-keyed verbatim quote vm: a single source page yields multiple records only when the reader extracts evi-dence under several acceptance criteria, with each record tagged by its own ℓm. Records enter E with-out further LLM processing; this mechanical side-channel is what keeps the writer’s [[ m]] resolvable to a verbatim quote at audit time. 

X Termination Control 

Termination is governed by the planner’s finish() ac-tion, together with a code-level convergence guard and a wall-clock soft deadline. The two conditions of §3.6 describe the ideal termination state; their enforcement is split across mechanical and prompt layers. 

Convergence guard. A call to finish() signals the planner’s intent to terminate, but the system applies a guard before accepting it. The guard me-chanically enforces the node-level condition ∀ni ∈

NT : sTi̸ = UNKNOWN , i.e., every node must carry at least one finding. The edge-level condition is enforced at the prompt layer rather than the code layer: the planner is instructed to either explore each remaining to-solve edge or prune the node it targets via propose_restructure() with Rprune be-fore calling finish() . In practice, stale to-solve edges typically target nodes that are themselves still un-known , and are therefore caught by the node-level guard as a side effect. When the guard fires, the call is rejected with a structured message listing each of-fending node (with its incoming edges for context), and the planner is required to either (i) dispatch additional search tasks targeting these nodes, or (ii) call propose_restructure() with remove_node 

(Rprune ) for nodes whose accumulated evidence shows them irrelevant. The planner cannot bypass the guard; the response slot in the task graph is cleared and the loop continues until the condition holds or the soft deadline fires. 

Soft deadline. A wall-clock soft deadline 

Tmax (default 70 minutes; configurable via 

SOFT_DEADLINE_MINUTES ) caps long-running queries. When it fires, two things happen. First ,

add_task() rejects any new search dispatch, return-ing the message “soft deadline reached: call finish() 

to write the report”. Second , the manager invokes 

_enforce_soft_deadline , which removes every re-maining unknown node from Gt so that the next 

finish() call passes the convergence guard. The writing pipeline (§3.7) is then invoked on the re-sulting partial graph. An independent iteration cap 

max_turn (default 20 planning turns, with a hard ceiling at 3 × max_turn total iterations) protects against runaway loops in pathological cases that escape the wall-clock check. 

Action exclusivity. The three planner actions 

add_task() , propose_restructure() , and finish() are mutually exclusive within a single planner turn: each must be issued in its own code block, with no other actions in the same block. The add_task() 

vs. propose_restructure() dichotomy implements the search/restructuring split of Eq. 13; finish() sits on top of both as a third exclusive option, applied only at the end of a turn and accepted only when the convergence guard passes. 

XI Ablation Experiment Details 

We report four ablations targeting the three regu-latory loops of §1 plus the topological substrate that schema revision operates on, together with their full combination Afull . All ablations preserve the search interface, the Reader’s criterion-aligned extraction (Part A), the evidence store E, and the three-layer writing pipeline (§3.7); modifications are confined to the cognitive layer defined in §3.2– §3.6. All variants run on the same 100 DeepRe-search Bench queries with Config-27B and iden-tical external dependencies (Serper, Jina Reader, identical sampling temperature), so that ablation differences attribute to the cognitive layer rather than the system substrate. Table 9 delineates the precise boundary of each ablation, allowing reviewers to see at a glance which components are removed and which are pre-served. Each subsection then provides the concep-tual definition together with the rationale for any concomitant modifications. 

XI.1 A1: Deviation feedback 

A1 removes the deviation signal δtj (Definition 4) and the strategy router π (Eq. 4), forcing the plan-ner to decide search directions from implicit rea-soning over findings alone. Concretely, the Reader no longer emits CR-AAP scores or the Part-B 

unexpected_insights , the node-level qual-ity profile qtj is no longer aggregated, and the five-strategy table ( EXPLOIT / VERIFY / PIVOT / EX - 

> PLORE

/ SUBSTITUTE ) is removed from the planner prompt. The prompt-level removal is a necessary corollary: the strategy router π takes δ as input, and retaining the strategy table without the devia-tion signal would leave a dangling instruction that could spuriously activate strategies on absent input, contaminating the ablation’s semantics. All other Component A1 A2 A3 A4 Afull                                                                                                     

> Cognitive layer
> Deviation signal δtj(CR/AAP/ ϕ/ψ)×✓✓✓×
> Strategy router π:D → A search ×✓✓✓×
> State fusion ⊕G(Manager LLM reinterpretation) ✓✓×✓×
> KNOWN state transition ✓✓×✓×
> Contradiction tuples / cross-node routing Tt+1
> k✓✓×✓×
> Restructure ops {Rconc , R pivot , R correct }✓×✓×†×
> Restructure ops {Raug , R prune }✓✓✓✓✓
> Edge set Etexposed to planner ✓✓✓××
> hop_distance /discovery_dependency ✓✓✓××
> Upstream-neighbour context to searcher ✓✓✓××
> Shared infrastructure (preserved across all ablations)
> Searcher’s structured output with [[ m]] citations ✓✓✓✓✓
> Reader Part A with verbatim-quote constraint ✓✓✓✓✓
> Evidence store Eand [[ m]] traceability ✓✓✓✓✓
> Three-layer writing pipeline ✓✓✓✓✓
> Invariants I1 /I2 ✓✓✓✓✓

Table 9: Component-level boundary of each ablation. ✓ preserved; × removed. †: A4 restricts Astruct as a logical consequence of substrate flattening rather than an additional ablation (see §XI.4). 

mechanisms are preserved: ⊕G still interprets find-ings against the current Gt, Astruct remains com-plete, and the topology remains a graph. 

XI.2 A2: Schema revision 

A2 restricts Astruct from 

{Rconc , R aug , R pivot , R prune , R correct } to 

{Raug , R prune }, the subset that existing sys-tems can already realise through outline expansion and section pruning. Rconc (concretisation), Rpivot 

(axis rotation), and Rcorrect (premise correction) are blocked at three levels (prompt documentation, API call, and runtime execution), so that even an attempted invocation by the planner is intercepted. The two-phase safety protocol (Appendix IV) and invariants I1 /I2 remain unchanged, and the rest of the cognitive graph ( δ, ⊕G, topology) is unaffected. Thus A2 isolates the contribution of the three systematic restructuring operations beyond simple addition and removal. 

XI.3 A3: Interpretive update 

A3 replaces the interpretive-update operator ⊕G

with text concatenation. One clarification is needed up front: this does not mean node content be-comes unstructured prose . The Searcher’s output is itself shaped by its own prompt constraints into a coherent inquiry-centred answer that addresses each acceptance criterion in turn and carries [[ m]] citation markers (see Figure 12 for the Searcher prompt). What A3 removes is the Manager LLM’s 

secondary reinterpretation on top of this output. In the regular update path, ⊕G re-examines each find-ing in the context of Gt, classifying it against btij 

and f tj as criterion-satisfying, redundant, contra-dictory, or unexpected; recording contradictions as five-tuples; and routing cross-node material via T t+1  

> k

. A3 strips this prior-guided reinterpre-tation entirely, appending the Searcher’s already-organised output to the target node verbatim. Because the downstream consumers of ⊕G are removed alongside it, the cognitive state σ no longer has the basis for a transition to KNOWN .Nodes mechanically advance from UNKNOWN to  

> PARTIAL

on the first non-empty summary, and edge exhaustion becomes the sole termination signal. This is again a necessary corollary: the KNOWN 

judgement depends on the residual pending crite-ria that ⊕G maintains, and without the secondary interpretation those residues cannot be updated; al-lowing the transition would let the state machine ad-vance on inconsistent grounds. The graph topology, 

Astruct , and the evidence store E are unchanged. 

XI.4 A4: Topological substrate 

A4 flattens the structural state St = (Nt, E t)

from a graph to a parallel list of dimen-sions. The edge set Et is no longer ex-posed to the planner, hop_distance and 

discovery_dependency are eliminated, and the Searcher receives no upstream-neighbour con-text. All LLM-visible prompts are stripped of graph, edge, upstream, downstream, and hop termi-nology and reframed in terms of “research dimen-sions”, to avoid leaving conceptual residues that would mislead the planner after the substrate has changed. Consistent with the substrate flattening, A4 also restricts Astruct to {Raug , R prune }. This concomi-tant change is not an additional ablation but a log-ical consequence of the substrate change: Rconc 

subdivides a node into children with new edges, 

Rpivot rotates dependency direction between nodes, and Rcorrect propagates revisions along downstream subgraphs. All three are defined over graph struc-ture and have neither conceptual grounding nor an executable target on a flat list. The Manager LLM and the deviation signal δ are unaffected: Γ

still produces structured updates and CR-AAP still drives strategy selection. Thus A4 isolates the con-tribution of graph topology as a representational substrate. 

XI.5 Afull : All four mechanisms ablated 

Afull stacks A1, A2, A3, and A4 simultaneously. The result is a minimal system that dispatches parallel searches over a flat list, accumulates the Searcher’s output without secondary reinterpreta-tion, decides next actions from the planner’s im-plicit reading of accumulated text, and admits only 

Raug /R prune when restructuring. Both regulatory loops (deviation feedback and schema revision) and the entire structured cognitive layer are removed, leaving only the search, reading, and writing infras-tructure. A subtle interaction between two failure modes is worth noting in Afull . When run alone, A3 con-tracts the external search ratio to 0.42 × baseline because the Manager no longer tracks pending cri-teria, leading the planner to underestimate uncov-ered gaps and terminate prematurely. When run alone, A1 inflates the external search ratio to 1.31 ×

because the absence of deviation signals traps the planner in inefficient retries. When stacked, A3’s premature termination preempts A1’s deadlock ten-dency, yielding an intermediate ratio of 0.55 × and a 0% timeout rate. This complementary-failure pattern is discussed further in §5. 

XII Case Study: Sovereign Wealth Investment (Query 53) 

We trace one full assimilation/accommodation cy-cle on DeepResearch Bench query 53 (“Research-ing how the world’s wealthiest governments in-vest”) to make the three loops concrete on a single trajectory. The query is illustrative because its first-round search exposes a textbook concept-vs-entity 

mismatch in the initial framing: the planner had assumed a single “wealthiest governments” node feeding two abstract dimension nodes, but the evi-dence actually co-locates by investing entity. The system recognises the mismatch, proposes Rconc ,and after restructuring continues on a topology that compresses what would have been 4 × 2 = 8 task slots into 4 entity-focused investigations. Final RACE Overall is 0.578 (Insight 0.620 ), placing the query in the top quartile of VeriTrace’s English-language runs. 

XII.1 Trajectory at a glance 

The full trajectory comprises 9 planner iterations across 4 search turns, summarised in Table 10. The remainder of this appendix walks through three pivotal moments: the Rconc decision in §XII.2, the deviation-driven strategy routing in §XII.3, and the termination guard plus three-layer writing pipeline in §XII.4. 

XII.2 Initial graph and the Rconc trigger 

The Cognitive Graph Manager parses the query into four entities and three edges (Figure 6, left panel). e1 (start ) anchors the user question; e2 is a placeholder for the wealthiest-governments list; e3

asks how those governments operate their wealth; 

e4 asks how they allocate assets. Edges r2 : e2 → e3

and r3 : e2 → e4 encode the planner’s prior assump-tion that two parallel dimensional investigations follow once e2 is populated. The planner’s first add_task call on r1

targets e2 with two core acceptance crite-ria; after the search executes and the Cogni-tive Graph Manager assimilates the response, 

e2 carries 13 discovered_items indexed by global [[ m]] refs, plus two Reader Part-B 

unexpected_insights . Figure 3 reproduces both the issued task and the resulting compiled graph state that the planner reads on the next turn. After Round 1 on r1, the planner detects a struc-tural rather than informational gap. The devia-tion profile shows e2 accumulating 13 strong find-ings (GDP-leading top-10, SWF top-5, plus Reader Part-B unexpected_insights on state-level pensions exceeding national SWFs and foreign shell companies distorting GDP figures), while downstream dimensions would inherit none of the per-entity distribution they require; Reader pages consistently bundle “operating mechanism Round 1: first task and resulting graph state 

(a) Planner’s first add_task on r1:

add_task( node_name = "task_wealthiest_governments_definition_ranking", cognitive_edge_id = "r1", cognitive_target_id = "e2", task_type = "open", core_criteria = ["definition and indicators of governmental wealth", "country/government wealth rankings and top 10"], supplementary_criteria = ["data-source institutions", "consistency across indicators", "composite assessment methods"], 

node_content = """ Goal: explore the definition of 'world's wealthiest governments' and the currently accepted ranking. Constraints: prefer 2023-2024 data; international organisations / academic / authoritative finance media. Do NOT presuppose a single canonical definition -- let the search reveal how the concept is operationalised in practice.""") 

(b) Cognitive graph state after Round 1 (compiled view, what the Planner reads next turn): 

## Current Cognitive Graph State 

**Structure type**: convergence ### Entity Nodes - [START] User question (e1, hop=0) - [PARTIAL] Wealthiest governments list (e2, hop=1) - Discovered items (top-GDP): US [[1]], China [[1]], Germany [[2]], Japan [[2]], UK [[7]], India [[6]], France [[2]], ... - Discovered items (SWF-managers): PBoC ($3.7T) [[16]], NBIM ($2.1T) [[17]], SAFE ($1.95T) [[16]], GPIF ($1.88T) [[19]], CIC (\$1.57T) [[17]] - Cross-item insights: - definitional split: GDP vs gov assets [[6]][[33]] - top-3 SWFs control >50% of global SWF AUM [[18]] 

- Unexpected (Reader Part-B): - state pensions may exceed nat'l SWFs [[35]] - shell companies distort GDP figures [[3]] - Quality: CR=3.6 AAP=3.7 finding=strong, unexpected=moderate - Supplementary pending: gov_balance_sheet_rankings ### To-solve inquiry goals - e2 --operating_mechanism--> e3 (r2, 0/3) - e2 --asset_allocation--> e4 (r3, 0/3) 

Figure 3: What the Planner sees at the start of Turn 2. (a) The first add_task dispatched on edge r1 targets e2 with two core acceptance criteria. (b) After the search executes and the Cognitive Graph Manager assimilates, e2 carries 13 discovered_items indexed by global [[ m]] refs, plus two Reader Part-B unexpected_insights . This is the input on which the planner emits the reflection in Figure 4. Turn (iter) Planner action Outcome / signal                                                         

> 0parse G04 nodes, 3 edges; e2, e 3, e 4UNKNOWN
> 1add_task on r142 URLs, 13 findings on e2; cr = 3 .6, aap = 3 .7, find = strong 2 (r) reflect, no code (Figure 4) co-occurrence diagnosis on e2; candidate ops Rconc +Rpivot resolved to single Rconc
> 2 (a) propose_restructure (Rconc )(Figure 5) Phase 1: +4 nodes, +4 edges; cascade-remove e3, e 4; violations = 0 34 parallel add_task s on rdyn,1..4 all 4 nodes →PARTIAL ;π=EXPLOIT on each 4–6 4 follow-ups (3 EXPLOIT , 1 PIVOT )edyn,k →KNOWN ;task_gov_fiscal_health_ranking writes back to e2via Tt+1 2
> 7termination reflection (Figure 8) →
> finish()
> GT: 6 nodes, 594 evidence records, 103 unique [[ m]]
> 8writing pipeline (3 layers) 8 sections, 52 insights, 25 K-char report

Table 10: Query 53 trajectory. Each row is one planner iteration; Turn 2 is split into reflect ( R) and act ( A)sub-iterations to surface the two-step pattern. Figure cross-references in the planner-action column point to the verbatim reasoning logs shown in this appendix. Source: run log q053_parallel_*.log .

+ asset allocation” by investing entity rather than by dimension. Rather than searching, the plan-ner emits its full deviation analysis as a thinking-only iteration with no executable code (Figure 4), identifying two candidate operators, Rconc (con-cretise e2) and Rpivot (rotate the dimension-vs-entity axis), and resolving that Rconc with bundled 

core_criteria already subsumes Rpivot , so a single operator suffices. On the next iteration the planner commits this analysis to a structured 

propose_restructure call. The Man-ager’s evaluation independently echoes the same dual-operator framing (“concretisation plus axis rotation”), and its Phase 1 edits are reproduced verbatim from the log. Figure 5 also shows the four parallel add_task calls dispatched immediately after the restructure, so the reader can see what the new topology turns into operationally. The before/after structural change is visualised in Figure 6: e3 and e4 are cascade-removed, four entity-focused nodes edyn,1. . . 4 branch from e2, and the bundled criteria of the deleted edges are inher-ited by each new edge. 

XII.3 Deviation signal, strategy router, next task 

After restructuring, the four entity-focused tasks run in parallel. We zoom into 

task_nbim_investment_profile to make the deviation-to-strategy chain concrete. A representative high-quality page (NBIM’s own Government Pension Fund Global annual report) scores (c, r, α, β, ρ ) = (4 , 4, 5, 4, 3) ,yielding via Eq. 16–17 the page-level composites cr m = 4.00 and aap m = 4.15 . Aggregating across the 13 pages of the task gives the node profile (cr dyn,1 , aap dyn,1 ) = (3 .9, 4.4) with 

finding_strength=strong and no accessi-bility barriers. The strategy router π then evaluates the predicates of Eq. 4 in priority order; Figure 7 traces the full Likert-to-composite-to-decision chain. The strategy router’s choice materialises as the fol-lowing add_task call:                                    

> add_task(node_name ="task_nbim_esg_thresholds", cognitive_edge_id ="r_dyn_1", cognitive_target_id ="e_dyn_1", ,→
> task_type ="specified", specified_source ="NBIM official exclusion guidelines", ,→
> core_criteria =["ESG exclusion quantitative thresholds"], ,→
> supplementary_criteria =["review process and decision mechanism"], ,→
> node_content ="""Find specific quantitative thresholds in ,→
> NBIM ethical screening: coal-revenue %, nuclear/weapons ,→
> revenue red lines, environmental/human-rights triggers ,→
> requiring committee review.""")

Note the task_type="specified" field and the named source: this is what EXPLOIT (narrow within the same source family ) compiles to mechan-ically. The same procedure on the other three new nodes yields three further EXPLOIT -class follow-ups. On e2, where Reader Part-B flagged a missing fiscal-health dimension, the planner instead routes to PIVOT and cre-ates task_gov_fiscal_health_ranking ,which writes back to e2 via cross-node routing 

T t+1 2 (Definition 2). A single (cr , aap , ϕ, ψ ) tu-ple per node thus yields four different next-task templates across four nodes in the same turn: the deviation signal is an active selector, not a passive monitor. At convergence the same selector mechanism flips polarity: rather than triggering exploit/pivot, it triggers termination. After 4 entity-focused tasks plus 4 follow-ups (3 EXPLOIT , 1 PIVOT ), all 5 en-tity nodes reach PARTIAL or KNOWN , but Searcher feedback continues to flag can_improve=True Planner reflection on round-1 findings (verbatim from log, translated) 

Findings review :

e2 now contains substantive findings: - definitional split: GDP vs gov assets - GDP top-10 (US, CN, DE, JP, UK, ...) - SWF top-5 (PBoC, NBIM, SAFE, GPIF, CIC) - unexpected_insights (Reader Part-B): * state pensions may exceed nat'l SWFs * shell companies distort GDP figures 

Downstream impact and concretisation :

- r2 (op-mechanism): per-entity inquiry, info lives in different sources. - r3 (asset-allocation): per-entity too. Conclusion: e2 should be concretised. Two classes: (1) GDP-leading economies (~10) (2) SWF managers (~5-6, e.g. China) => integrate to ~8-10 investing subjects. 

Axis-rotation diagnosis :

r2/r3 info co-occurs BY SUBJECT, not by dimension. Reports on NBIM cover both operation AND allocation; no single source covers all subjects on one dimension. => fold r2/r3 criteria into each subject's inquiry, avoid N x M. 

Restructure decision :

op_type = R_conc + R_pivot => R_conc with bundled core_criteria absorbs the rotation; one operator suffices for this state. 

Figure 4: The planner’s free-form deviation analysis on the round-1 findings, emitted as a thinking-only iteration with no executable code. Reader Part-B unexpected_insights feed into the diagnosis alongside Part-A acceptance criteria. The planner identifies two candidate operators ( Rconc and Rpivot ) and resolves that one absorbs the other under bundled core_criteria . The structured propose_restructure call follows on the next iteration (Figure 5). Rconc execution on e2 and Turn 3 dispatch (verbatim from log) 

Planner intent (op_type=R_conc ): 

"world's wealthiest governments" actually appears as two classes of subject: (1) top-GDP economies and (2) sovereign wealth managers (Norway NBIM \$2.1T, China PBoC/SAFE/CIC \$7.2T, Japan GPIF \$1.9T). The two downstream dimensions co-occur by subject, not by dimension. Concretise e2 into 4 subject nodes; fold r2/r3 criteria into each subject's inquiry, collapsing 4x2=8 prospective tasks into 4. 

Manager Phase 1 edits (added=4, removed=2, violations=0 ): 

+ add_node e_dyn_1 Norway NBIM (\$2.1T) + add_node e_dyn_2 China SWF system (PBoC/SAFE/CIC, \$7.2T) + add_node e_dyn_3 Japan GPIF (\$1.9T) + add_node e_dyn_4 US Federal investment system + add_edge r_dyn_1 .. r_dyn_4 (e2 -> e_dyn_k) - remove_node e3 (cascade: r2) - remove_node e4 (cascade: r3) protected = {e1, e2} (N_user) preserved = f_2^t (I1: 13 findings on e2 untouched) 

Manager evaluation: 

"Search has identified four primary investing subjects; 

downstream dimensions co-occur by subject. Concretisation plus axis rotation into 4 focused tasks is a reasonable cognitive-graph evolution." 

Aftermath: Turn 3 dispatches 4 parallel tasks (one per new entity): 

add_task(node_name = "task_nbim_investment_profile", cognitive_target_id = "e_dyn_1", task_type = "open", core_criteria = ["fund size and AUM trajectory", "operating mechanism (mandate, governance)", "asset allocation by class and geography"], ...) add_task(node_name = "task_china_swf_investment_profile", cognitive_target_id = "e_dyn_2", task_type = "open", core_criteria = ["PBoC/SAFE/CIC division of labour", "operating mechanism per entity", "asset allocation per entity"], ...) # (+ task_gpif_investment_profile, task_us_federal_investment_profile) 

Figure 5: The complete Rconc trace from the run log, plus the four parallel add_task s the planner dispatches on the next turn. Acceptance criteria of the deleted dimension nodes are folded into each new edge’s core_criteria ,so each edyn,k inherits both “operating mechanism” and “asset allocation” as bundled inquiry. Phase 2 reachability check passes with no orphans. (a) G0 : initial graph (4 nodes, 3 edges) 

e1 : START 

e2 : wealthiest governments 

> (placeholder)

e3 : op-mechanism 

e4 : asset allocation     

> r1
> r2r3
> 4×2 = 8 prospective task slots

=⇒    

> Rconc
> (b) Gtafter Rconc : 4 entity-focused inquiries

e1 : START 

e2 (I1 : f2 preserved) 

> 13 findings retained

e3 : op-mech e4 : alloc 

edyn,1 

Norway NBIM 

edyn,2 

China SWF 

edyn,3 

Japan GPIF 

edyn,4 

US Federal       

> each rdyn,k inherits bundled criteria {op-mech, asset-alloc }⇒8 prospective slots collapse to 4entity-focused tasks

Figure 6: Cognitive graph before (a) and after (b) Rconc on query 53. Findings on e2 are preserved ( I1 ); e3, e 4 are cascade-removed because their inquiry criteria fold into the new entity-focused edges, turning 4 × 2 = 8 prospective task slots into 4.

on each remaining edge. The planner’s termina-tion reflection (Figure 8) then partitions the resid-ual gaps into search-recoverable and structurally-unrecoverable categories, and emits finish() 

on the basis of the latter rather than continuing to expend budget on signals that further search cannot close. 

Termination reasoning (verbatim log) 

Termination check :                      

> -0UNKNOWN nodes; all 5entity nodes (e1, e2, e_dyn_1..4) PARTIAL or KNOWN. -4investigating edges at 2/3 attempts; Searcher feedback still flags can_improve=True on every edge.

Capability-boundary diagnosis :                                       

> r1 (gov fiscal-health rankings): structural absence: IMF and World Bank hold the data but publish no unified ranking. r_dyn_1 (NBIM coal-revenue threshold): disclosure form: NBIM exclusion is qualitative, not quantitative. r_dyn_2 (IMF submission technical channel): sensitivity: API/FTP specs kept private. r_dyn_3 (GPIF voting-against trigger): access barrier: deep PDF content beyond Searcher's page_limit.

Decision :                    

> Residual gaps are structural /disclosure /sensitivity /access barriers, not search-strategy failures. Further search would inflate cost without raising recall. => emit finish().

Figure 8: Planner reasoning at the convergence guard. The deviation profile distinguishes search-recoverable gaps from gaps that further search can-not close (structural absence, disclosure form, sensi-tivity, access barriers), allowing the planner to emit 

finish() rather than continuing to expend budget against can_improve=True signals. 

XII.4 Three writing layers on a 6-node graph 

On termination GT has 6 nodes, 594 evidence records in E, and 103 unique global [[ m]] refs. The three-layer pipeline narrows information ac-cess in lockstep with decision authority (Fig-ure 9). Layer 1 (OutlinePlanner) sees the full graph but only finding summaries (no quotes) and the per-node evidence-availability index, and emits an outline of 8 sections each bound to a node subset Vk (e.g. V7 = {edyn,1 , e dyn,3 , e 2}

for the governance-evolution section). Layer 2 (SectionPlanner) runs sequentially across §1–§8; each planner sees only its section’s evidence in-dex {(m, ℓ m)} restricted to S

nk ∈Vk Ek, and re-turns insights as (claim , I, hint ) tuples with |I| ∈ 

[2 , 5] (52 insights total on this run). On §7, the planner attempted to bind ref [[64]] to an insight on Norway’s exclusion-decision pause; the post-filter caught that [[64]] was outside E7 and stripped it before the insight reached the writer (logged verbatim as [SectionPlanner] Removed invalid evidence refs {64} ). Layer 3 (SectionWriter) runs sequentially with each writer seeing only the verbatim quotes vm for its section’s (a) Page rating → composite scores                                          

> 012345
> Likert score
> c4cred
> r4rel
> α5acc
> β4purp
> ρ3rec
> page composites (Eq. 16–17): cr m= 0 .30 ·4 + 0 .70 ·4 = 4.00
> aap m= 0 .40 ·5 + 0 .35 ·4 + 0 .25 ·3 = 4.15
> node profile edyn,1 (over 13 pages):
> (cr ,aap )=(3 .9,4.4) , find-ing = strong ,ψ=none ,ϕ= 0
> (b) Strategy router π(δ)on edyn,1
> Accessible?
> Relevant? SUBSTITUTE
> Credible? PIVOT
> EXPLOIT VERIFY
> yn
> yn
> yn
> next add_task :task_nbim_esg_thresholds
> (SPECIFIED -SOURCE , narrowed criterion)

Figure 7: From a Reader page rating to a strategy choice on edyn,1 . The path Accessible-yes → Rel-yes → Cred-yes selects EXPLOIT , which routes the next add_task to a narrowed sub-criterion within the same source family. 

bound I.One paragraph from §2 reads (translated): “ NBIM’s exclusion guidelines specify that companies with more than 30% of revenue from thermal-coal extraction are subject to product-based ex-clusion [[19]] ; the same threshold applies to thermal-coal-fired power generation [[19]] [[27]] ,with conduct-based exclusion further triggered by serious environmental damage or systematic human-rights violations [[21]] .” All three [[ m]] mark-ers resolve to NBIM’s own Observation and Exclu-sion Guidelines document and a Norwegian Min-istry of Finance regulation, both retrieved on the 

> EXPLOIT

-routed follow-up of the previous subsec-tion. The chain is therefore traceable end-to-end: Reader Part-A’s verbatim quote → E insertion →

SectionPlanner binding → SectionWriter rendering 

→ post-filter audit. 

XII.5 Why this case demonstrates all three loops 

The trajectory exhibits all three loops in a single cycle. Interpretive update made the diagnosis pos-sible: e2’s discovered_items list and the per-item co-occurrence pattern are state recorded by 

Γ, not facts re-derived on each turn; Reader Part-B 

unexpected_insights (state pensions, shell-company GDP distortion) entered the planner’s re-flection alongside Part-A acceptance criteria. Devi-ation feedback stopped the planner from grinding on r2/r3: the deviation profile carried both “strong” findings on the placeholder and the absence of any per-entity distribution that downstream dimensions would have needed, exposing a structural rather than informational gap. Schema revision converted the diagnosis into action: Rconc rewrote topology while preserving f2 untouched, and the new topol-ogy compressed eight prospective tasks into four entity-focused investigations that all closed within one round each. Deviation feedback manifests at both ends of this trajectory in opposite modes. At Rconc the typed deviation profile triggers a structural revi-sion (Figure 4). At finish() the same pro-file distinguishes search-recoverable gaps from unrecoverable ones (structural absence, disclo-sure form, sensitivity, access barriers; Figure 8), stopping the search rather than continuing on 

can_improve=True signals. The correspond-ing ablations on this query show A3 failing the trigger entirely (no discovered_items for the planner to read off) and A2 running the original 

4 × 2 = 8 -task topology to budget exhaustion. This failure-mode contrast drives the −4.75 /−5.18 pp gap on the accommodation-sensitive subset (Ta-ble 6). Layer 1 – OutlinePlanner    

> sees full graph + finding summaries (no quotes) emits 8 sections, each bound to Vk⊆NT

Layer 2 – SectionPlanner (sequential ×8)          

> sees only Ekindex {(m, ℓ m)}(no quotes) emits 52 insights as (claim ,I,hint ),|I| ∈ [2 ,5]

Layer 3 – SectionWriter (sequential ×8)               

> sees verbatim quotes vmfor bound Ionly renders 25K-char report with [[ m]] markers
> info narrows
> graph view
> no verbatim text
> evidence index only
> §7 ref [[64]] dropped
> bound quotes only
> §2: 112 records →87
> RACE Overall 0.578 | Insight 0.620 (GT: 6 nodes, 594 records, 103 unique [[ m]] )

Figure 9: Three-layer writing pipeline on query 53. Information access narrows in lockstep with decision authority: Layer 1 sees the graph but no quotes; Layer 2 sees the section’s evidence index but no quotes; Layer 3 sees the bound quotes only. 

XIII Use of Large Language Models 

We use large language models in two distinct roles. 

As components of the system under study , LLMs serve as the planner, searcher, reader, prefilter, writer, and cognitive graph manager agents within VeriTrace. Per-role backbone assignments and per-configuration details are reported in Table 1, Ap-pendix VII, and Appendix XV. 

As writing and presentation assistants , the authors used LLMs in several auxiliary capacities: gram-mar polishing, table formatting, and sentence-level rephrasing in the manuscript; drafting and debug-ging code for the implementation; and assisting with figure generation, which the authors then re-viewed and edited. All technical claims, method-ological designs, derivations, and experimental analyses were authored and verified by human au-thors; no LLM-generated text or code was incor-porated without verification against the underlying experiments, and no LLM was used to ideate the metacognitive framework or its theoretical motiva-tion. 

XIV Cost Analysis 

End-to-end cost decomposes naturally over Veri-Trace’s four agent roles and the three writing layers. We report per-query consumption and US-dollar cost computed by applying Alibaba Cloud Bailian per-model rates (Table 11) to the per-model token breakdown released in evidence/*.json ’s 

usage_stats . Tokens reflect prefill plus de-code; input and output tokens are priced separately. CNY rates are converted to USD at the May 2026 spot rate of 7.2 CNY/USD .                                

> Model ¥in/M ¥out/M $in/M $out/M
> Q3.5-35B-A3B 0.4 3.2 0.056 0.444 Q3.5-27B 0.6 4.8 0.083 0.667 Q3.5-Plus 0.8 4.8 0.111 0.667 Q3.5-122B-A10B 0.8 6.4 0.111 0.889 Q3.6-Plus 2.0 12.0 0.278 1.667 DSv4-Flash 1.0 2.0 0.139 0.278 DSv4-Pro 12.0 24.0 1.667 3.333

Table 11: Per-token rates (per 1M tokens). Source: Al-ibaba Cloud Bailian public pricing, regular (non-cached) rates as of May 2026. USD column uses 7.2 CNY/USD. Q = Qwen, DSv4 = DeepSeek-V4. Cached-input rates (¥1/M for DSv4-Pro, ¥0.2/M for DSv4-Flash) are ig-nored here for conservative reporting. 

Cost composition for Config-DeepSeek. Of the $1.96 per-query cost, the DSv4-Pro path (Plan-ner, Searcher, and Writer) contributes $1.73 (88%, $1.33 input + $0.40 output), and the DSv4-Flash path (Cognitive Graph Manager, Reader, and PreFilter) contributes $0.23 (12%). The input-dominated cost profile (75% input vs 25% output) reflects the fact that Planner and Searcher repeat-edly re-prompt the same cognitive graph context across multi-turn search dialogues. Enabling Bail-ian’s cached-input rate (¥1/M for DSv4-Pro, a 12 ×

discount on cached prefixes) would reduce overall input cost by approximately 50–80% in practice (depending on prefix reuse), lowering the realised per-query cost to roughly $0.7–$1.2. Config LLM/q in (K/q) out (K/q) Search/q Wall/q (min) $in/q $out/q Total $/q (¥)                                 

> Config-3B 260 2261 1391 57.05 45.80 0.127 0.618 0.74 (¥5.35) Config-27B 212 1592 1106 47.31 57.41 0.112 0.521 0.63 (¥4.56) Config-Plus 264 2224 1348 59.45 64.78 0.284 1.102 1.39 (¥9.98) Config-DeepSeek 225 1750 461 46.59 40.61 1.461 0.495 1.96 (¥14.08)

Table 12: Per-query cost across configurations (means over 99–100 queries’ usage_stats ; rates from Table 11). Config-DeepSeek uses DSv4-Pro for the Planner, Searcher, and Writer, and DSv4-Flash for the Cognitive Graph Manager, Reader, and PreFilter. Although DSv4-Pro is the most expensive component (15 × Q3.6-Plus’s input rate, 2× output rate), the per-query cost stays moderate because DSv4-Flash handles the high-volume Manager/Read-er/PreFilter roles. 

XV Reproducibility Checklist 

We summarise every artefact and configuration pa-rameter required to reproduce the results in this paper. All numbered items are released with the code repository unless marked otherwise. Component Specification 

Models and APIs 

Config-3B (all roles) Qwen3.5-35B-A3B (3B active / 35B total) Config-27B Planner/Searcher/Writer: Qwen3.5-27B (dense); Reader/PreFilter: Qwen3.5-35B-A3B Config-Plus Planner/Searcher/CGM: Qwen3.5-Plus (17B/397B); PreFilter: Qwen3.5-35B-A3B; Reader: Qwen3.5-122B-A10B (10B active); Writer: Qwen3.6-Plus (17B/397B) Config-DeepSeek Planner/Searcher/Writer: DeepSeek-V4-Pro (49B active / 1.6T total); Reader/Pre-Filter/CGM: DeepSeek-V4-Flash LLM judge for RACE Gemini 2.5 Pro ( gemini-2.5-pro , Vertex AI) LLM judge for DeepConsult Gemini 2.5 Pro ( gemini-2.5-pro , Vertex AI) Search engine Serper Google API ( SERPER_API_KEY )Page-content retrieval Jina Reader ( r.jina.ai ); PDF/Excel/CSV via dedicated parsers 

Hyperparameters fixed across all runs 

τh (Rel/Cred threshold) 3.5 (between Likert “adequate” and “good”); Appendix VI 

τl (low-quality threshold) 2.5; gates structural escalation 

τψ (unexpected threshold) “moderate or stronger” on the 4-level ordinal; gates the U NEX predicate 

K (max attempts per edge) 3; Definition 3, Appendix III 

Tmax (soft deadline) 70 wall-clock minutes ( SOFT_DEADLINE_MINUTES ); independent iteration cap 

max_turn = 20 with 3× hard ceiling; Appendix X Quality-profile cap 50 most-recent records per node; Appendix III Phase 2 orphan-repair rounds ≤ 5 before rollback; Appendix IV SectionPlanner |I| [2 , 5] ref-ids per insight SectionWriter context window default 15 K-character tail ( PREVIOUS_TEXT_MAX_CHARS ); per-language ceilings 20 K(CN) / 40 K (EN); Appendix IX Reader verbatim quote length 200 –500 characters per finding 

Datasets and protocols 

DeepResearch Bench 100 queries (CN+EN), official RACE pipeline; Du et al. (2025) DeepConsult 102 queries; OpenAI DR reference reports as bundled in the DeepConsult release (Lim et al., 2025); judge: Gemini 2.5 Pro 

Table 13: Reproducibility checklist. 

XVI Loop Comparison Across Deep Research Systems 

The three loops introduced in §1 ( interpretive up-date , deviation feedback , and schema revision ) are not VeriTrace-specific design preferences but prop-erties that, in our analysis, support a calibrated and evolving model of the task across long search horizons. Table 15 compares VeriTrace against the three open-source baselines along these three axes. 

XVII DeepConsult Win/Tie/Loss Evaluation 

We present per-dimension Win/Tie/Loss rates fol-lowing the LLM-judged DeepConsult protocol (Lim et al., 2025) (Gemini 2.5 Pro, 102 queries), using the same evaluation pipeline as Table 4. Each row compares VeriTrace (Config-27B) against one of the baselines with respect to the OpenAI Deep Research reference report. Baseline numbers are taken directly from their respective generated evalu-ation files, while the VeriTrace results are obtained from its corresponding evaluation bundle, as sum-marized in Table 14. Dim. System Win% Tie% Lose% Avg. NWR 

Instr. Follow. Enterprise-DR 53.9 20.6 25.5 4.89 0.679 FS-Researcher 69.6 8.8 21.6 5.37 0.763 WebWeaver 67.6 17.6 14.7 5.72 0.821 

VeriTrace 73.5 15.7 10.8 6.00 0.872 

Compre-hens. Enterprise-DR 71.6 13.7 14.7 6.56 0.829 FS-Researcher 77.5 3.9 18.6 6.78 0.806 WebWeaver 90.2 5.9 3.9 7.76 0.958 VeriTrace 90.2 5.9 3.9 7.31 0.958 

Complete-ness Enterprise-DR 73.5 12.8 13.7 7.24 0.843 FS-Researcher 80.4 7.8 11.8 7.72 0.872 WebWeaver 85.3 8.8 5.9 8.22 0.936 

VeriTrace 98.0 1.0 1.0 8.62 0.990 

Writing Quality Enterprise-DR 59.8 17.6 22.6 5.76 0.726 FS-Researcher 63.7 14.7 21.6 6.10 0.747 WebWeaver 57.8 19.6 22.6 5.56 0.720 

VeriTrace 62.8 13.7 23.5 5.85 0.727 Overall 

Enterprise-DR 64.7 16.2 19.1 6.11 0.769 FS-Researcher 72.8 8.8 18.4 6.49 0.797 WebWeaver 75.2 13.0 11.8 6.81 0.859 

VeriTrace 81.1 9.1 9.8 6.94 0.887 

Table 14: Per-dimension DeepConsult results under the matched Qwen3.5-27B backbone (102 queries; judge: 

gemini-2.5-pro ). Win/Tie/Lose are percentages; Avg. is the 0–10 score, with 5 denoting a tie. Dimension-level NWR is computed as Win Win +Lose , excluding ties; Overall NWR is the arithmetic mean of the four dimension-level NWRs rather than a pooled win rate. Bold indicates the best result within each dimension. VeriTrace achieves the best Overall NWR and leads on Instruction Following and Completeness; in Comprehensiveness, it ties WW on Win/Tie/Lose/NWR but has a lower Avg. by 0.45 points. Writing Quality is the only dimension where FS-Researcher leads on Win% and Avg. System Interpretive update Deviation feedback Schema revision VeriTrace (ours) ✓ Each finding is interpreted against the concept’s current state: classified against the target con-cept’s current criteria and accu-mulated evidence, not in isola-tion, and the result is written back to that concept’s resolution state 

sj and residual criteria, so the system tracks how far each con-cept is resolved and re-targets search at the specific criteria it still leaves unsatisfied ( Γ, §3.3, App. III). 

✓ Before each search the plan-ner declares what the concept expects to obtain; the outcome is scored against that expecta-tion into a typed deviation sig-nal, which routes the planner to a matching correction strategy rather than an undifferentiated retry (§3.4, App. VI). 

✓ When accumulated feed-back shows the framing it-self diverges from reality, struc-tural operators rewrite concepts and their relations while ev-idence is preserved (invariant 

I1 ), and the revised framing in turn reshapes the plan, so the agent escapes its initial framing (Rconc /R pivot /R correct , App. IV). WebWeaver (Li et al., 2025b) 

✘ Evidence updates the re-port outline without being inter-preted against any concept’s cur-rent state, and the outline carries no per-concept resolution state, let alone its unsatisfied criteria; the system tells only whether the outline looks complete, not how far each concept is resolved. 

✘ The planner only judges whether evidence is sufficient for a comprehensive outline; with no per-search declared expectation, outcomes are never scored into a typed deviation, and missing evi-dence triggers more search rather than a matching correction strat-egy. 

✘ The report outline is continu-ously restructured, but on report sections, not an explicit concept structure: structural revision is left to the LLM’s implicit reason-ing, with no operator that rewrites concepts and their inquiry rela-tions while preserving evidence. Our A2 ablation shows implicit reasoning alone is insufficient for such restructuring on harder queries (§5.2). FS-Researcher (Zhu et al., 2026) 

✘ Evidence is filed into atopic-organised knowledge base without being interpreted against any concept’s current state. Its only criteria are a static, task-level acceptance checklist (files present, format, coverage), not per-concept criteria that track what each concept still owes; so the system cannot tell how far any individual concept is resolved. 

✘ The Context Builder decides whether to keep searching from a coarse sense that information is still missing; it declares no per-search expectation and scores no outcome into a typed devia-tion, so a shortfall triggers an-other undifferentiated browsing round, not a matching correction strategy. 

✘ Todos and files can be added or reordered, but the concept struc-ture of its knowledge is never re-structured when the framing di-verges from reality; revision stays at the task/file level, not the con-cept structure. Enterprise-DR (Prab-hakar et al., 2025) 

✘ Reflection detects gaps and contradictions, but only over a global running summary with no explicit per-concept resolution state; these judgements stay at the summary level and never become an update to how far any individ-ual concept is resolved, so the system stops when the summary looks complete rather than when each concept is actually resolved. 

✘ Reflection detects knowledge gaps in prose, but without a per-search declared expectation it can-not type the deviation or route a matching strategy; missing infor-mation triggers more search, not targeted correction. 

✘ Reflection re-plans a flat todo list, but the initial concep-tual framing is never structurally rewritten when the framing di-verges from reality; it cannot es-cape a wrong frame. 

Table 15: Loop feature matrix: each deep research system against the three loops of VeriTrace. ✓: realised as an explicit, typed mechanism; ✘: absent or left to the LLM’s implicit reasoning. The empirical consequences of each loop are isolated by ablations A1 (deviation feedback), A2 (schema revision), and A3 (interpretive update) in Table 5. XVIII Full Prompt Library 

Simple-mode summary. For readers who want a one-line view of each agent role before reading the verbatim prompts, the twelve roles are summarised in Table 16. The full prompts (with the {var} 

placeholders that the system substitutes at runtime) follow in Figure 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14. The five figures reproduce a simplified skeleton of each prompt: the complete control-flow logic is shown, while few-shot examples and verbose error-handling fragments (roughly 60% of total prompt length) are omitted for space. The full prompts will be released with the code upon publication. Role One-line job 

Search-side roles 

1. Planner Reads the cognitive graph, picks one of { add_task , propose_restructure , finish }. 2. CGM (parse mode) Turns the user question into the initial concept-level cognitive graph G0.3. CGM (update mode) Implements Γ (App. III): classifies each finding as criterion-satisfying , redundant , contradictory , or unex-pected .4. Searcher Runs web_search / multi_search / select_pages ; emits [[m]] -cited synthesis. 5. PreFilter Drops only off-topic or duplicate results; permissive by design. 6. Reader Extracts criterion-tagged findings with mandatory verbatim quotes (Part A) plus unexpected insights (Part B). 

Verification + writing-side roles 

7. Evidence Verifier Gate before E: rejects or corrects answers not supported by the verbatim quote. 8. OutlinePlanner Layer 1: decides S sections and the node subset Vk ⊆ NT each section covers. 9. SectionPlanner Layer 2: emits (claim , I) insight pairs with |I| ∈ [2 , 5] from Ek .10. SectionWriter Layer 3: writes one section at a time; only sees Ek ; [[m]] markers are post-filtered against bound evidence. 

Restructuring (App. IV) 

11. Phase 1 (surgical) Applies Rk ∈ A struct on the modifiable subgraph; refuses under a multi-criterion rubric (e.g., Nuser deletion, weak rationale, aggregation-only nodes). 12. Phase 2 (orphan repair) Reattaches orphans via BFS up to five rounds; rolls back to eGt otherwise. 

Table 16: One-line summary of the twelve VeriTrace agent prompts. Full text is reproduced in Figure 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14; placeholders {var} are substituted at runtime. 

VeriTrace agent prompts — Planner and Cognitive Graph Manager 

1. Planner (CodeAct) (core/react_prompt.py )

You are a search planner managing search tasks on a cognitive graph. Your goal is to progressively build a knowledge graph to answer complex questions. ## Core Principle Your sole mission is to fully and thoroughly answer the user's original question. When findings or unexpected_discoveries reveal important content the user did not anticipate (background factors, new research directions, specific source types), actively follow those discoveries and dig deeper. The cognitive graph externalises your current understanding -- it shows what you know, what you don't know, and what to search next. ## Role Definition You are the Architect of the search process. You do not search the web directly; you maintain a graph object whose nodes are search tasks and whose edges are dependencies. You iteratively expand the graph until all cognitive-graph edges are explored or removed. ## Capability boundary (Searcher can ONLY ...) 1. Search the public web; 2. Read publicly accessible pages and PDFs. The Searcher CANNOT: download files, perform page interactions (clicks/forms/downloads), extract large structured datasets, access paywalled or login-gated content, or call arbitrary APIs. ## Information-flow boundary The cognitive graph is YOUR private workspace. The Searcher automatically receives the direct parent node's findings as background, but cannot see the full graph. Cognitive-graph content is ONLY updated through search results. 

## API (sandboxed) add_task(node_name, node_content, task_objective, attention_notes, is_verification, cognitive_edge_id, cognitive_target_id, task_type, specified_source, core_criteria, supplementary_criteria) # assimilation: dispatch a search task propose_restructure(op_type, reasoning) # accommodation: R_k in A_struct finish() # termination: subject to convergence guard ## Strategy selection (consume the deviation signal delta_j) exploit | verify | substitute | pivot | explore -- selected by pi(delta). 

Figure 10: VeriTrace agent prompts (1/5): Planner (CodeAct). Continued in Figure 11, 12, 13, and 14. VeriTrace agent prompts — Cognitive Graph Manager 

2. Cognitive Graph Manager — parse mode (cognitive_graph_manager.py )

You are a cognitive-graph parsing expert. Parse the user's question into aconcept-level cognitive graph -- extract research dimensions and conceptual relationships, rather than predicting specific entities. Output schema (JSON): {"thinking_summary": "...", "entities": [{"id":"e1", "name":"...", "type":"start|placeholder", "cognitive_state":"START|UNKNOWN", "type_constraint":"...", "condition_constraints":[...], "hop_distance":int, "discovery_dependency":"e_<src>"}], "relations": [{"id":"r1", "source":"e_i", "target":"e_j", "type":"...", "inquiry_goal":"a searchable question", "state":"to_solve", "task_type":"open|specified", "specified_source":null|"..."}], "structure": {"type":"serial|parallel|convergence|mixed", "parallel_chains":[...], "convergence_nodes":[...]} }

3. Cognitive Graph Manager — update mode (§3.3, Γ) (cognitive_graph_manager.py )

You are a Cognitive Graph Update Expert. Given the Searcher's response and the current graph G_t, perform a four-step update on the target node n_j: 

1. Extract discovered_items: organisations, products, or systems that directly answer the inquiry goal (exclude metadata). 2. Route findings by attribution: per-item attributes -> item_findings; patterns/rankings spanning items -> cross_item_findings. 3. Reconcile against acceptance criteria: residual unsatisfied criteria are written back as core_pending / supplementary_pending. 4. Branch divergent material: - Contradictions on the same criterion -> contradictions list as records {criterion, old_claim, new_claim, resolution, kept}. - Unexpected (relevant to original question AND outside criteria) -> unexpected_discoveries list. - Access failures or confirmed data absence -> search_experience (mutually exclusive with findings). Cross-node routing: findings whose semantic content matches a non-target node n_k are admitted to n_k via T_k^{t+1} = T_k^t U {task_t}; capped at 1-2 new edges per task. START nodes are immutable. 

Figure 11: VeriTrace agent prompts (2/5): Cognitive Graph Manager (parse + update modes). Continues from Figure 10. VeriTrace agent prompts — search execution side 

4. Searcher (graph.py )

You are a web search agent. Your task is to search for information and provide comprehensive answers with citations. ## Available Tools 1. web_search: {"query": "..."} # single query 2. multi_search: {"queries": ["q1", "q2", "q3"]} # max 5 queries; results deduplicated and merged 3. select_pages: {"indices": [0, 2, 5]} # dispatched to parallel Reader agents ## Multi-search usage by task type - SPECIFIED SOURCE: combine source expressions x topic keywords, e.g. ["site:williamreed.com Top 100 confectionery", "\"William Reed\" Top 100 confectionery companies", "\"William Reed Business Media\" confectionery ranking 2024"] - OPEN EXPLORATION: use different angles -- keywords, perspectives, languages. ## Output Return a synthesis that answers the search task with [[m]] citations indexed to a local ref2url map; the orchestrator remaps these to global ref-ids. 

5. PreFilter (Stage 1) (prefilter.py )

You are a search result filter. Your ONLY job is to remove results that are 

completely off-topic or duplicate. When in doubt, KEEP the result -- the Searcher needs to read broadly, including sources that might seem low-authority, in order to verify the user's claims. Inputs: task content, acceptance criteria, list of (index, url, snippet). Output: {"read": [...indices...], "skip": [...indices...], "reasoning": "brief: why each skipped result is off-topic or dup"} 

6. Reader (dual-track Part A + Part B) (reader.py )

You are a precise information extractor. TWO tasks: 1. Extract structured answers to acceptance criteria (Part A) 2. Discover valuable information BEYOND the criteria (Part B) ## Part A rules - COMPLETENESS: extract ALL information the page contains; no shortcuts. - DATA ACCURACY: when reading tables, list ALL column headers first, count from LEFT to RIGHT, include both row and column position when citing numbers. - EVIDENCE REQUIREMENT (mandatory): every finding MUST include a direct, verbatim quote (200-500 characters) copied from the page. If you cannot find an exact quote that supports a finding, DO NOT report that finding. "evidence" is NOT your summary -- it is the page's own words. - Two evidence types: descriptive (verbatim sentences) and table evidence (complete row + headers on next line). ## Part B rules Surface unexpected_insights: facts that (i) help address the original 

question's dimension and (ii) lie completely outside all acceptance criteria. Look for: contradictions to Planner assumptions, important unasked entities/relationships, timeline changes, follow-up leads. ## Output (flat JSON; not nested under part_a/part_b) {"findings": {"<criterion>": {"answer":..., "evidence":...}}, "gaps": [...], "unexpected_insights": [{"label":..., "insight":..., "evidence":...}], "quality_scores": {"currency":int, "relevance":int, ...}, "temporal_context": "single string about page's effective time", "accessibility_notes": [{"criterion":..., "barrier":..., "detail":..., "alternative_hint":...}]} 

Figure 12: VeriTrace agent prompts (3/5): Searcher + PreFilter + Reader. VeriTrace agent prompts — verification + writing-side planning 

7. Evidence Verifier (evidence_verifier.py )

Check whether the answer matches the evidence, and correct it if there are errors. **Task goal**: {task_goal} **Acceptance criteria**: {criterion} **Answer**: {answer} **Evidence**: {evidence} Output: a corrected answer if the original is unsupported or contradicted by the evidence quotes; flag any hallucinations before findings are admitted to the evidence store E. 

8. OutlinePlanner (Layer 1) (outline_planner.py )

You are a professional research report architect. Design a report outline structure that directly answers the user's original question. Inputs: - Original question q- Cognitive graph summary (only nodes with non-empty findings; empty roots are skipped) - Evidence-availability index: per node, the distinct ref_idx values in E

Rules: - One section per major aspect requested by the prompt. - Bind each section to a node subset V_k of N_T (relevant_node_ids). - Skip sections whose evidence is too thin to support analysis. Output (JSON list of sections): [{"section_id":int, "title":str, "description":str, "answers_aspect":str, "relevant_node_ids":[...]}] 

9. SectionPlanner (Layer 2) (section_planner.py )

You are a senior research analyst. Plan insights and their evidence bindings for ONE report section. Inputs: - The section spec (title, description, answers_aspect, V_k) - Subgraph findings for V_k - Evidence index for the section: {(ref_idx, criterion)} restricted to E_k = {m : task_m in T_k^T} - previous_plans: insights of all earlier-numbered sections (no markers) Rules: - Each insight is a (claim, evidence_ids) pair. - |evidence_ids| in [2, 5], drawn EXCLUSIVELY from E_k (no cross-section reuse). - Skip any insight semantically subsumed by a prior one (cross-section deduplication). 

Figure 13: VeriTrace agent prompts (4/5): Evidence Verifier + writing-side planning (OutlinePlanner / SectionPlan-ner); see Figure 14 for the writer + restructuring. VeriTrace agent prompts — writer + restructuring 

10. SectionWriter (Layer 3) (section_writer.py )

You are a senior research analyst and report writer. Write ONE high-quality analytical section for the report. Inputs you see: - Original question - Full report outline (so this section continues the narrative) - Section spec + planned insights with bound evidence_ids - Section evidence subset E_k (verbatim quotes v_m + finding summaries f_m) - previous_text: 15K-char tail of earlier-written sections (continuity only) Rules: - Embed [[m]] citation markers for each cited evidence ref. Refs from other sections are NOT visible at generation time. - A post-filter (FilterInvalidCitations) strips any [[m]] whose m is not in the section's bound evidence; removals are logged for audit. - Write one claim per paragraph; do not repeat insights from previous_text. 

11. Restructuring Phase 1 (surgical) (LLM stage of Appendix IV) 

You are a graph editor. Apply operator R_k in {R_aug, R_prune, R_conc, R_pivot, R_correct} on the modifiable subgraph (nodes outside N_user with empty findings, edges with status to_solve). 

Evaluate each proposed change against a multi-criterion rubric. Refusal conditions include (non-exhaustive): - deletion target is in N_user (enforces I2); - rationale cites local search difficulty ("search has been difficult", "no results found") rather than structural misalignment; - merge would produce a pure aggregation node with no acceptance criteria of its own (Searcher cannot aggregate across arbitrary upstream nodes); - proposed deletion contradicts evidence already in f_j^t (violates I1). On refusal, the snapshot G_tilde is restored and the rejection reason is returned to the Planner. 

12. Restructuring Phase 2 (orphan repair) (LLM stage of Appendix IV) 

After Phase~1, some nodes may be unreachable from the user-question root. Detect orphans via BFS: N_orphan = N(G') \ Reachable(root, E(G')). Propose reattachment edges that connect each orphan to an existing reachable node, preserving the protected sets P^N (nodes with findings or in N_user) and P^E (edges with search history). You have at most 5 rounds. If orphans remain after the 5th round, the entire restructuring is rolled back to G_tilde. 

Figure 14: VeriTrace agent prompts (5/5): SectionWriter (Layer 3) + Restructuring Phase 1 (surgical edit) + Phase 2 (orphan repair). Continues from Figure 10, 11, 12, and 13.