Title: AgenticDataBench: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Data Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.01647v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Jul 2026 00:27:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# AgenticDataBench: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Data Agents 

## Zhaoyan Sun 1,2, Shan Zhong 1, Daizhou Wen 2, Jiaxing Han 2, Guoliang Li 1, Ying Yan 2, Peng Zhang 2,Yu Su 2, Xiang Qi 2, Baolin Sun 2, Chengyuan Yang 2, Tao Fang 2, Huaiyu Ruan 2

1 Tsinghua University, 2 Ant Digital Technologies, Ant Group szy22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,liguoliang@tsinghua.edu.cn,fuying.yy@antgroup.com 

## ABSTRACT 

Data science aims to derive actionable insights from heterogeneous raw data, unlocking the value of the massive amounts of data gen-erated in modern society. Automating this process is essential to reducing labor-intensive efforts for data scientists and enabling scalable data-driven applications. Recently, large language model (LLM)-based data agents have emerged as a promising solution to automate data science workflows. However, the field lacks com-prehensive benchmarks to rigorously evaluate these agents across diverse scenarios with fine-grained granularity. To address this gap, we propose AgenticDataBench , a comprehensive benchmark featuring realistic tasks spanning diverse domains with fine-grained ground-truth labels . This enables evaluations to capture the diver-sity and complexity of data science workflows and the detailed performance of agents. First, to cover diverse domains, we collect real datasets and tasks from 15 vertical domains, including 5 real-world B2B use cases from a leading fintech company. Second, to remove redundancy in real-world tasks and generate high-quality tasks for domains lacking real data, we introduce data science skills, recurring data-centric operational patterns (e.g., “Handling Missing Data”), and quantify benchmark coverage by the number of skills included. Representative skills are extracted from large-scale task solutions on Stack Overflow using skill-aligned hierarchical clus-tering. Third, for real-world business tasks, we select task-solution pairs that maximize diversity in skill composition, ensuring broad coverage of practical scenarios. Fourth, to generate realistic tasks for devise domains without real tasks, we propose a systematic LLM-based task generation approach to create workflows and tasks based on these skills. Finally, we evaluate state-of-the-art data agents us-ing our annotated benchmark and open-sourced testbed, providing detailed skill-level insights. 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

Data science aims to extract actionable insights from heteroge-neous raw data, which plays a central role in realizing the value of massive data generated in modern IT and business [ 23 ]. Tradition-ally, data scientists expend substantial effort on understanding and processing poorly organized data, incorporating implicit domain knowledge, and iteratively implementing complex codes. Recent advancements of large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated superiority in data science–related tasks such as planing [ 27 , 46 , 47 , 53 ], reasoning [ 26 , 57 , 61 ], database opera-tions [ 37 , 50 , 51 , 55 , 56 , 62 –65 , 68 , 69 ], and code generation [ 59 , 67 ], leading to the emergence of data agents that automate end-to-end insight extraction from raw data with minimal human interven-tion [32, 34, 36, 44, 48, 49, 52, 54, 66]. Here we present a simplified workflow of data agents (see Fig-ure 1a). (𝑖 ) Planning. Given a complex data science task (e.g., pre-dicting loan delinquency from monthly user statistics with AUC Compute monthly statistics and predictive metrics (missing  

> rate, …, KS) for all features in input.csv , using apply_date
> as month. Missing values are filled with -1. Output
> output.csv with col, date, and metrics.

(1) Loan Risk Control Task           

> for month in months:
> for col in feature_cols:
> feature_values =df[ col ].fillna( -1)
> ...
> missing_count =df[ col ].isna().sum()
> Preprocess feature and label columns.

(2) Ground-Truth Solution 

(3) Skill-Level Analysis                                  

> Handling Missing Data
> def compute_missing_rate (s):
> return (s== -1).sum() /len (s)
> Smolagents
> for tin thresholds:
> pos_cum =np .sum(pos <= t)/len (pos)
> neg_cum =np .sum(neg <= t)/len (neg)
> ks =abs (pos_cum -neg_cum )
> Effi cient Data Structures
> and Algorithms
> DA-Agent
> Step Timeout
> Compute feature statistics and predictive metrics.
> def calculate_ks (... ):
> data =data .sort_values ('score' ,ascending =False )
> ...
> ks =np .max( np .abs(
> data ['cum_good' ]-data ['cum_bad' ]))

(4) Leaderboard   

> Score: approx. match statistics & metrics.
> 1
> 3
> 2Smolagents CodeX
> Smolagents Skill Pros & Cons: …

Data Source Domains 

Financial , Loan Model, Loan Risk, 

Marketing, Strategy 

Real 

Business 

Public 

Dataset 

Agriculture, Ecommerce, Energy, 

Entertainment, Healthcare, Real Estate, 

Sports, Social Network, Tourism, 

Transportation 

Dataset 

Select 

Select 

Task 

Select 

Gen 

Skills 

155 

433 

(a) An AgenticDataBench Instance. 

(b) AgenticDataBench Creation. 

Figure 1: Agentic Data Science Benchmark Example. 

evaluation), the agent interprets user instructions and grounds them in relevant data sources. The challenge lies in instruction ambigu-ity (e.g., whether missing values should be filled with -1 instead of being pre-filled), heterogeneous data schemas, and large-scale datasets (e.g., “input.csv”) that necessitate iterative exploration. 

(𝑖𝑖 ) Iterative Execution. The agent iteratively plans actions, gener-ates executable code, and interacts with execution environments (e.g., Python, databases). It progressively constructs an executable reasoning chain from intermediate results, such as adjusting fea-ture processing or selecting more efficient algorithms under time constraints. (𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) Termination. The process terminates upon either successful completion or reaching predefined step or time limits. 

Motivation. While numerous data agents have been proposed, a comprehensive evaluation framework for their systematic compar-ison is still lacking. Drawing from real-world data science prac-tices, we identify that an effective benchmark should feature real-istic tasks spanning diverse domains, accompanied by fine-grained ground-truth labels , enabling the evaluation to capture both the diversity and complexity of data science workflows as well as the detailed performance of agents. However, as shown in Table 1, ex-isting benchmarks fall short of meeting these criteria. They often rely on a limited set of manually selected task types, overlook the complexities of real-world business applications, and provide only coarse-grained task categories and aggregate scores, which obscure step-level behaviors. To address this gap, we propose a systematic pipeline for build-ing a comprehensive data agent benchmark (see Figure 1b). Our 

> arXiv:2607.01647v1 [cs.DB] 2 Jul 2026

Table 1: AgenticDataBench vs Existing Data Agent Bench-marks (– indicates no solution code). Benchmark # Skills Covered # Tags of Task # Lines of Code Data Source Data Modality Data (MB) Per Task                                      

> DSBench [29] –2–Public Competition (Semi-)Structured, Text 11.1 BLADE [25] 51 216.3 Public Study Structured 2.4 DA-Code [28] –10 85 [28] Public Dataset (Semi-)Structured, Markup, Text, Binary, Database 23.0 DataSciBench [60] 281 633.4 Public Dataset (Semi-)Structured, Text, Binary 0.8 ScienceAgentBench [20] 220 11 40.1 Public Study (Semi-)Structured, Markup, Text, Binary 54.3 KramaBench [31] 194 934.4 Public Study (Semi-)Structured, Markup, Text, Binary 15.8
> AgenticDataBench 433 433 113.6 Real Business, Public Dataset (Semi-)Structured, Markup, Text, Binary, Script, Database 493.4

approach begins by collecting real datasets and tasks from 15 verti-cal domains, including 5 real-world B2B practices from a leading fintech company [ 2]. These tasks involve complex scenarios with large-scale noisy data and long code implementations. However, these raw tasks are not directly suitable for benchmarking due to 

(𝑖 ) redundancy caused by repeated patterns with minor variations (e.g., consistently filling missing values with -1), and (𝑖𝑖 ) the lack of high-quality tasks for certain domain datasets. To address this, we abstract recurring data-processing patterns shared across tasks as data science skills (e.g., “Handling Missing Data” in Figure 1), and quantify benchmark coverage based on the number of skills included. From extensive task solutions, we derive a representa-tive skill set (see Figure 2) and select tasks that maximize skill diversity. For generating tasks in uncovered domain datasets, we ensure benchmark quality by (𝑖 ) sampling realistic skill composi-tions, (𝑖𝑖 ) promoting skill diversity across tasks, and (𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) achieving comprehensive coverage of the extracted skills. Additionally, skill annotations provide the foundation for fine-grained analysis of data agent performance. 

Challenges. There are three main challenges. C1: Discovery of Highly Representative Skills. It is non-trivial to extract data science skills from large task collections with ensured diverse rep-resentation [ 18 ], i.e., a relatively small set of skills that represent data science operations in solving these tasks. C2: Task Selection for Collected Real-world Tasks. For the collected real-world tasks, we aim to select a highly representative set of tasks that capture diverse workload patterns and scenarios while minimizing redundancy to ensure benchmarking efficiency. C3: Realistic Task Generation for Public Datasets. For public datasets that lack pre-defined tasks, it is essential to systematically generate realistic tasks while ensuring comprehensive coverage of underrepresented skills. To tackle these challenges, we introduce AgenticDataBench , a comprehensive data agent benchmark built on the foundation of data-driven, discovered data science skills. First, we extract repre-sentative skills from large-scale task solutions from Stack Over-flow [ 15 ] through skill-aligned hierarchical clustering. Specifically, we leverage LLMs to break down task solutions into stepwise skill descriptions. To eliminate redundancy, we cluster semantically sim-ilar skills using pretrained text embeddings and refine each cluster through LLM-based splitting to identify distinct higher-level skills. This cluster-and-refine process is applied recursively, producing a representative set of high-level skills (addressing C1 ). Next, for real-world business tasks within each domain, we select task-solution pairs that maximize diversity in skill compositions, ensuring cov-erage across a wide range of practical scenarios (addressing C2 ). Data Format     

> Handling
> File I/O &
> Serialization
> File System
> Interaction
> Data
> Format
> Batch File
> Handling
> CSV
> Parquet
> …
> Data Pre-
> Processing
> Data
> Cleaning
> Transformation
> Data Validation &
> Consistency
> Feature
> Engineering
> …
> Encoding
> Type Casting
> Imputation
> …
> Outlier Handling
> Invalid Data Handling
> Feature Selection
> …
> Dimension Reduction
> Data
> Manipulation
> Indexing &
> Structure
> Filtering
> Ordering
> Merging Key Alignment
> …
> Mutation
> Column-wise
> …
> Row-wise
> Element-wise
> Reshaping
> Concatenation
> Joining
> Data
> Analysis
> Statistics
> Aggreagtion
> Pattern
> Analysis
> Corrrelation
> …
> Trend
> Clustering
> Window Functions
> …
> Group-By
> Statistical Metrics
> …
> Sampling
> Hypothesis Testing
> Data
> Modeling
> Model
> Design
> Ensemble
> …
> Bayesian Model
> Loss Function
> Hyper-Parameter
> Tuning
> Model
> Evaluation
> Performance
> Metrics
> …
> Cross-Validation
> Model
> Deployment
> Data
> Visualization
> Color Mapping
> …
> Labels & Legends
> Layout
> Plot
> Type
> Liine
> Bar
> Scatter
> Density
> Boxplot
> Violin Plot
> …
> Coordinate System
> Cross-
> Stage
> Environment
> Management
> Error
> Handling
> Parallel
> Computing
> SQL &
> Database
> Algorithm
> Optimization
> …
> GeoJSON
> Encoding
> …
> Metadata
> Log
> 2
> 45
> 13
> 67

Figure 2: 433 Skills Generated by AgenticDataBench .

Finally, to ensure the benchmark comprehensively represents the ex-tracted skills, we propose a systematic LLM-based task generation approach. This method samples frequency-aware skill composi-tions, uses structured dataset profiles, and generates corresponding workflows and tasks based on these skills (addressing C3 ). 

Contributions. In summary, we make the following contributions: (1) We propose a data science skill framework (see Section 2) and subsequently develop a comprehensive data agent benchmark, 

AgenticDataBench , characterized by fine-grained skill composition and real-world complexity (see Section 3). We open-source the testbed at https://github.com/AgenticDataBench/AgenticDataBench. (2) We propose a hierarchical skill extraction algorithm, which performs agglomerative clustering aligned with skill boundaries using LLM-based semantic refinement (see Section 4). (3) We propose task selection and generation modules with con-trolled skill coverage, including selecting skill-diverse real-world tasks and generating realistic tasks that simulate practical skill compositions (see Section 5). (4) We have conducted an in-depth fine-grained empirical study of state-of-the-art data agents, uncovering four key insights (see Section 6). 

## 2 PRELIMINARIES 2.1 Data Science Benchmark 

Solving a data science task typically involves a sequence of data-related operations. We identify and summarize recurring operation patterns into skills, which represent higher-level capabilities char-acterized by similar application stages, technology stacks, or sys-tematic objectives. For example, data preprocessing can be viewed as a high-level skill that encompasses several fine-grained skills such as missing data handling and feature engineering. Together, these skills provide a multi-faceted characterization of real-world data science workflows. 

Definition 2.1 (Data Science Skill). A data science skill, 𝑠 , is de-fined as a data-centric operational pattern commonly used to solve data science tasks. Formally, skills are structured in a hierarchi-cal tree, where each skill node 𝑠 includes a textual description 𝛿 𝑠 

and is linked to its child skills, which represent more fine-grained capabilities. The parent-child relationships within the tree reflect abstraction and specialization among skills, with higher-level nodes 

2representing broader, more general operations, while leaf nodes correspond to specific, actionable skill patterns. For instance, Figure 1a presents some examples of data science skills. “Handling Missing Data” involves identifying NULL values (e.g., incomplete records or artifacts from prior processing), and applying appropriate strategies such as imputation, removal, or transformation to ensure data consistency. We will discuss the scope of data science skills in detail in Section 2.2. Recently, data agents powered by LLMs have been introduced to automate the entire pipeline of data science tasks, from organization to execution. To comprehensively evaluate such agents, we propose a benchmark designed to ensure broad coverage of data science skills. Each benchmark instance consists of a data science task necessitating specific skills for its resolution, along with a ground-truth solution and an evaluation function. 

Definition 2.2 (Data Science Benchmark Instance). A data science benchmark instance is represented as a quintuple (𝛿 𝑡 , 𝐷, 𝑦, 𝑆, 𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 ),where 𝛿 𝑡 is a textual task objective description, 𝐷 is the dataset required to solve the task, 𝑦 is the executable task solution, 𝑆 is the set of skills required to solve the task as reflected in the solution 𝑦 ,and 𝑒𝑣𝑎𝑙 is an evaluation function that maps the output of the data agent to a scalar score in [0, 1], quantifying its performance. For instance, Figure 1a presents a representative data science benchmark. The task description specifies the required statistical computations, including rules for handling missing data and the output format (e.g., CSV). The dataset consists of user loan behavior records in a wide-format CSV file. The solution is a complete im-plementation that satisfies both correctness and efficiency require-ments. The associated skills capture key competencies (e.g., “Han-dling Missing Data”, “Efficient Data Structures and Algorithms”) and enable fine-grained analysis of agent failures. The evaluation function compares monthly, user-level metrics between agent out-puts and the ground truth using a normalized mean squared error. This yields a final score for ranking agents and supporting skill-level analysis (Section 3.3). 

## 2.2 Data Science Skill 

In this section, we discuss the categorical scope of data science skills, and clarify how they differ from the notion of Agent Skills. 

Data Science Skill Category. Data science skills that underpin task solutions can be categorized into seven exclusive categories according to stages of the data science workflow (see Figure 2): (𝑖 )

Data Format Handling , including data parsing and file handling; 

(𝑖𝑖 ) Data Preprocessing , including data cleaning, transformation, validation, and feature engineering; (𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) Data Manipulation , in-cluding restructuring, indexing, filtering, modifying, and merging data; (𝑖𝑣 ) Data Analysis , including pattern exploration, statistical computation, and aggregation for data insights; (𝑣 ) Data Modeling ,including design, training, evaluation, and deployment of statistical and machine learning models; (𝑣𝑖 ) Data Visualization , including creation of charts and other visual data representations; (𝑣𝑖𝑖 ) Cross-Stage Skills are general-purpose skills applicable across multiple stages, such as environment management, error handling, SQL & database, code optimization. 

Discussion. Some works implement agent skills as reusable mod-ules that extend LLM capabilities [ 1 , 21 ], such as guidance, knowl-edge, scripts, and examples, dynamically incorporated to enhance scenario-specific actions. Others theoretically conceptualize skills as atomic units underlying LLM performance, analyzing outcomes at the skill level [ 17 , 19 , 30 , 35 , 39 , 40 , 58 ]. Unlike these, we focus on data science scenarios, proposing a representative, data-driven skill set as a quantifiable foundation for benchmarking data agents, as elaborated in Section 4. 

## 3 BENCHMARK OVERVIEW 3.1 Design Goals 

We design AgenticDataBench by following the four benchmark de-sign criteria proposed by Jim Gray [24]. 

Relevance. The benchmark covers a wide range of real datasets and data science task patterns. First, we collect 97 real datasets spanning 15 domains from various sources, including 46 Kaggle datasets [ 8], 2 UCI ML datasets [ 7], 2 Mendeley datasets [ 9], and 8 academic and government datasets (UCSD [ 43 ], BIRD [ 33 ], NatEarth [ 10 ], 2 from NYC TLC [ 16 ], U.S. BTS [ 4], NCI GDC [ 6], OWID [ 11 ]), and 39 real business applications at Ant Group. Next, we abstract recurring data-centric operational patterns as data science skills, extracting 433 representative skills from 6,510 high-quality Stack Overflow data science task solutions. Based on these skills, we generate 344 benchmark tasks that collectively cover all identified skills while simulating realistic skill compositions and usage patterns. 

Simplicity. The benchmark is designed to reduce task redundancy and enhance clarity. We introduce data science skills to capture core operational patterns in task solutions, and construct the benchmark by (𝑖 ) selecting 102 real-world tasks from Ant Group with maximal skill diversity and (𝑖𝑖 ) generating 242 additional tasks with con-trolled skill coverage. Each task and its corresponding solution are independently annotated by data science experts with the skills re-quired, allowing for a detailed analysis of the data agent’s strengths and weaknesses at the skill level. 

Scalability. The benchmark includes large-scale datasets and di-verse tasks of realistic complexity, requiring over 1,560 person-hours of careful construction and labeling. First, the datasets span 15 domains, totaling over 27.3 GB of data across 18 file formats, with 123.1M rows and 35.0K attributes (real business data: 5 domains, 20.1 GB, 7 file formats, 59.4M rows, 4.4K attributes). Next, as shown in Table 1, the benchmark contains 344 realistically complex data science tasks covering 433 skills, with an average of 23.5 skills per task, 113.6 lines of solution code, and 493.4 MB of data per task. 

Portability. The benchmark is compatible with a wide range of data agent systems that accept natural language task descriptions and support data file input or manipulation. 

## 3.2 Benchmark Methodology Overview 

Based on these design goals, we construct the data agent bench-mark using a systematic creation methodology. First, we introduce a data science skill framework to guide benchmark development, capturing recurring task patterns and enabling skill-level diversity and coverage measurement (see Section 2). Next, we hierarchically 

> 3

(2) Skill-Diverse 

Task Selection 

> Task & Solution
> [Step 2.1] Annotate relevant skills.
> [Step 2.2] Greedily select tasks with
> the most uncovered skills.

(3) Skill Coverage-Driven Task Generation 

[Step 3.1] 

Skill Graph Creation 

> Skill Workflows
> of Solutions
> Skill
> Graph
> Merge

[Step 3.2] 

Task Ingredient Preparation    

> Real-World Graph Path
> Sample
> Skill-Annotated
> Task & Solution
> (2.1) Dataset (2.2) Skills (2.3) Examples

[Step 3.3] 

LLM-based Task Generation 

> Graph
> Dataset,
> Skills,
> Examples
> (3.2) Workflow
> Skill-based
> Workflow Gen
> (3.3) Task
> Workflow-based
> Task Gen

[Step 3.4] 

Expert Annotation 

> (4.1) Refined by experts.
> (4.2) Annotate solution
> & eval method.
> Task,
> Skills
> Reduce Sampling Probability of Covered Skills and Examples
> Task & Solution
> Annotated with Skills
> Task & Solution
> Annotated with Skills
> Skill Set
> Skill Set
> Data Science
> Task & Solution
> [Step 2.3] Refined by experts.
> (Task, Data,
> Solution,
> Skills, Eval)
> (3.1) Profile
> Structured
> Data Profiling
> Task Solution

[Step 1 .1 ]

Vanilla LLM 

Skill Extraction 

[Step 1.2] 

Embed-based 

Skill Clustering 

[Step 1.3] 

LLM-based Skill 

Cluster Refinement 

> Stepwise Skill
> Descriptions
> (2.1) Skill
> Embedding
> (2.2) Skill
> Clustering
> (3.2) Redundant
> Skill Merge
> (3.3) Parent Skill
> Summarization
> Hierarchically Cluster Skill Summaries

[Step 1.4] 

Skill Hierarchy 

Refinement 

> (4.1) Entangled
> Skill Elimination
> (4.2) Expert
> Examination

(1) Hierarchical Skill Extraction 

> Step
> Skills
> Skill
> Cluster
> Skill
> Hierarchy
> ⊆
> (3.1) Parent Skill-Aligned
> Skill Cluster Split
> Benchamrk
> Instances
> Gen
> Real

Figure 3: The Workflow of Constructing AgenticDataBench .

extract representative skills from large-scale task solutions (see Sec-tion 4). To evaluate the practical efficacy of data agents in industrial-grade scenarios, we collect real-world business datasets and tasks from a leading fintech company and reduce redundancy by select-ing skill-diverse representative tasks (see Section 5.1). Finally, to generate realistic tasks for other domains without predefined tasks and ensure comprehensive skill coverage, we generate tasks with realistic skill compositions that cover underrepresented areas (see Section 5.2). 

Hierarchical Skill Extraction. A vanilla approach extracts data science skills from task solutions using LLMs by decomposing step-by-step rationales and summarizing stepwise skills [ 40 ]. However, such approaches often produce a large number of loosely defined skills with redundancy and entanglement. To address this issue, we propose a hierarchical skill extraction method that further clus-ters related skills and abstracts higher-level skills, yielding a more compact and representative skill hierarchy. Specifically, we first de-compose task solutions into stepwise skill usage descriptions using vanilla LLM-based approach. Next, we cluster stepwise skills using pretrained text embeddings. As embeddings may capture seman-tic details irrelevant to skill abstraction, we further prompt LLM to refine each cluster by splitting it into subclusters aligned with higher-level skill boundaries and merging redundant skills. Then, to enhance representativeness, we recursively apply this cluster-and-refine procedure to the resulting skills to derive higher-level skills. The process continues until the number of skills falls below a predefined threshold. Finally, we manually refine the skill hierarchy to ensure quality. 

Skill-based Benchmark Creation. This stage builds realistic benchmark instances across 15 domains of public datasets and real business applications, selecting skill-diverse tasks from collected data and generating realistic tasks for public datasets, collectively covering all extracted skills. Each instance comprises a task descrip-tion, dataset, ground-truth solution, expert-annotated skill usage, and a task-specific evaluation method. 

(1) Skill-Diverse Task Selection. We select real-world task-solution pairs as benchmark instances by maximizing skill diversity to ensure diverse task patterns. Specifically, given the extracted representative skills, we first prompt LLM to annotate each task with its relevant skills. Since selecting a subset of tasks under a fixed budget to maximize skill coverage is an NP-hard problem [ 42 ], we adopt a greedy approximation strategy that iteratively selects the task covering the largest number of previously uncovered skills. Finally, we manually refine the selected tasks and solutions to form complete and suitable benchmark instances. 

(2) Skill Coverage-Driven Task Generation. To ensure compre-hensive coverage of representative skills, we propose an LLM-based pipeline to generate practical tasks under controlled skill compo-sitions. Specifically, we first construct a skill graph by merging skill application traces extracted from task solutions extracted from Stack Overflow and real practices, with frequency-based weights. Next, we sample skill compositions and few-shot task–solution ex-amples. Conditioned on them, we generate structured data profiles that model data formats and cross-dataset relationships, synthesize a skill-based workflow, and produce the corresponding task de-scription. To encourage diversity, we apply penalties to previously covered skills and few-shot examples during the sampling process. Finally, we manually refine the task, and annotate its solution code and evaluation method to form a complete benchmark instance. In the remainder of this section, we present the details about target test systems and evaluation pipeline of AgenticDataBench ,     

> 4Dataset Task
> LLM Harness Docker
> Bash Python
> Code
> Resp
> Output Scoring
> Skill-based
> Solution Analysis
> Ground-Truth Skills Eval Func
> Scores

Benchmark Instance 

Executor 

> Database

Data Agent Leaderboard  

> Solution Output

Figure 4: The Overview of AgenticDataBench Pipeline. 

and leave the details about hierarchical skill extraction and skill-based benchmark creation in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. 

## 3.3 AgenticDataBench Pipeline 

As shown in Figure 4, AgenticDataBench tests data agents through four components: Benchmark Instances , Data Agent , Executor , and 

Leaderboard . First, we load Benchmark Instances , each of which includes a data science task, dataset, the ground-truth solution and answer, required skills, and an evaluation function for scoring task performance. Second, the Executor is prepared within a Docker image, supporting Bash, Python, and database operations, and the benchmark dataset is loaded for exploration and execution. Third, the task is passed to the LLM-driven Data Agent , which iteratively generates and executes code in the Executor based on previous execution responses, and produces a final solution and output. The 

Leaderboard evaluates the solutions generated by the data agent, compares them against the ground truth, and ranks the data agent on the leaderboard based on its evaluation score. The evaluation process is conducted in two steps. (1) The evaluation function pro-duces a performance score. AgenticDataBench supports five scoring modes: (𝑖 ) table matching, which checks equality between the pre-dicted and ground-truth tables, allowing tolerance thresholds for numerical columns and exact matching for others; (𝑖𝑖 ) modeling-based scoring, e.g., mean squared error, normalized to [0, 1]; (𝑖𝑖𝑖 )

JSON matching, i.e., the proportion of keys with matched values (approximate matching for numerical fields within thresholds, exact matching otherwise); (𝑖𝑣 ) chart matching, which compares both underlying numerical data and plot configurations; (𝑣 ) exact and fuzzy text matching. (2) We conduct skill-level analysis by prompt-ing LLMs to compare the solution with the ground truth, using annotated skills as candidates and scoring information to identify incorrectly applied skills as root causes of performance gaps. 

## 4 HIERARCHICAL SKILL EXTRACTION 

We discuss how to extract a representative set of data science skills from a large corpus of data science task solutions. These skills comprehensively capture recurring data-related operational pat-terns across the solutions. Building on this skill framework, we construct benchmark data science tasks with controlled coverage and divergence among selected and newly generated tasks. 

Step 1: Vanilla LLM-based Skill Extraction. We first collect 6,510 data science tasks and solutions from Stack Overflow [ 15 ], filtering by (𝑖 ) relevant tags such as “data-science” and “data-analysis,” and 

(𝑖𝑖 ) quality indicators, including accepted answers or scores higher than 3. Next, since many solutions involve complex pipelines that require multiple data science skills, we employ LLM to decompose each solution into stepwise rationales of skill usage [ 40 ]. Specifically, we prompt LLM to ensure that each step corresponds to a distinct data science skill while preserving actionable details, and that the collection of steps collectively reconstructs the original solution. In total, this process yields 29,602 stepwise skill descriptions. However, these skills are unsuitable as a basis for benchmark creation due to three main drawbacks. (𝑖 ) Scalability. Tens of thou-sands of loosely defined skills hinder the construction of an efficient and effective benchmark at a manageable scale (see Table 1). (𝑖𝑖 )

Redundancy. A common issue is that many skill descriptions refer to the same underlying skill, reducing the diversity of the skill set. (𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) Entanglement. We also observe a prevalent entanglement phenomenon among extracted skills, where one skill represents a high-level abstraction that subsumes another. Such skills should not be simultaneously retained as representative. 

Step 2: Embedding-based Skill Clustering. The above draw-backs can be mitigated by adopting hierarchical clustering, where each cluster corresponds to a smaller set of higher-level skill abstrac-tions. Specifically, during the agglomerative clustering process [ 41 ], 

(𝑖 ) the number of top-level skills naturally decreases as clusters are progressively merged, and (𝑖𝑖 ) redundant or entangled skills, which often share similar semantics, are prone to being merged. First, we adopt a state-of-the-art text embedding model Qwen3-Embedding [ 13 ] to encode skill descriptions into vectors. We also apply UMAP [ 38 ] to reduce the embedding dimension while pre-serving local data manifold structures. Next, we apply GMM [ 45 ]for soft clustering, allowing skills to be associated with multiple higher-level skills. Since embedding vector similarities may fail to capture shared high-level skill abstractions due to irrelevant details (e.g., formats or topics), we further use LLMs to split each cluster and align it with coherent higher-level skills (see Step 3). To fit LLM context, we constrain the number of skill descriptions in each clus-ter below a predefined threshold. If a cluster exceeds this threshold, we recursively apply GMM to split it into smaller clusters. 

Step 3: LLM-based Skill Cluster Refinement. We split each cluster into sub-clusters representing higher-level skill abstractions, yielding a more compact hierarchy than the original low-level skill annotations. Specifically, for each cluster of semantically related skills, we prompt LLMs to derive higher-level skills and group the low-level skills accordingly. We also preserve the lineage between low-level skills and their parent skills. Since many skills correspond to synonymous skills, we apply DBSCAN [ 22 ] to detect and merge them. Specifically, we embed the LLM-generated skill descriptions using Qwen3-Embedding model, and perform clustering with a strict distance threshold to separate semantically divergent skills. We then merge the synonymous skills, and select the shortest skill description as their representative. If the resulting top-level skills remain too numerous for a man-ageable benchmark scale, we further repeat the cluster-and-refine process to derive fewer higher-level skills. Specifically, we generate 

> 5

a summary for each skill by augmenting the LLM-generated de-scription with representative solution steps that exhibit the largest average cosine similarity to the other steps using the skill. We recur-sively cluster these skill summaries until the number of top-level skills falls below a predefined threshold. 

Step 4: Skill Hierarchy Refinement. We further address entan-glement in the skill hierarchy, where an LLM-generated skill is often overly general if it subsumes another skill at the same or a shallower level. Specifically, we extract syntactic tokens from skill descriptions and identify entanglement via token-set subset relations, assuming such containment indicates semantic subsump-tion. We then replace overly general skills with their more specific children, and update the hierarchy accordingly. Finally, we engage data science experts to review the top-level skills to ensure they are appropriately scoped, diverse, represen-tative of common data-related operations in practice, and aligned with realistic evaluation scenarios. Through this process, we obtain 433 top-level skills. 

## 5 SKILL-BASED BENCHMARK CREATION 

We describe the construction of AgenticDataBench based on the ex-tracted data science skill set. Each benchmark instance consists of a task description grounded in real-world datasets, a ground-truth so-lution, annotated skills required to solve the task, and a task-specific evaluation method. To reflect practical data science challenges, we incorporate real-world datasets and tasks across real business do-mains within a leading fintech company (see Section 5.1). Then, to ensure cross-domain coverage and comprehensive skill coverage, we generate additional tasks over real-world datasets from diverse domains with specific skill compositions (see Section 5.2). 

## 5.1 Skill-Diverse Task Selection 

Given massive corpus of anonymized production data from Ant Group’s B2B ecosystem, 30 domain experts from 5 business units spent over 600 person-hours curating 600 representative and com-plex tasks from real-world practice. These tasks span diverse indus-tries, including commercial banking, consumer finance, internet finance, insurance, automotive, aviation, mobile manufacturing, and retail. They also cover a wide range of scenarios (e.g., exploratory analysis, modeling, operations), and preserve realistic challenges such as noise, long-tailed distributions, and feature leakage. Since many tasks exhibit similar operational structures with variations only in parameters or datasets, we propose a skill-diverse task selection method that adopts the skill framework to maximize coverage across diverse task patterns while reducing redundancy. We implement the method in three steps: 

Step 1: Relevant Skill Annotation. For each task, we use LLMs to annotate relevant skills. Specifically, we evaluate the presence of each candidate skill in the task solution independently using the asynchronous batch inference mode of the Bailian platform [ 3]. Next, we input the solution and the identified skills into LLMs and prompt LLMs to infer skill dependencies and generate a skill usage trace, which is later used to simulate skill composition during task generation (see Section 5.2). 

Step 2: Skill-Diverse Task Selection. To enhance benchmark effi-ciency, we select a representative subset of tasks under a predefined budget while maximizing skill coverage. This can be formulated as an NP-hard problem that maximizes a submodular set function, i.e., the number of skills covered by the selected task set. It admits a 1 − 1/𝑒 approximation guarantee via a greedy algorithm [ 42 ]. Specifically, we iteratively select tasks, each time choosing the task that covers the largest number of previously uncovered skills, until the selected task set covers all candidate skills. 

Step 3: Expert Refinement. To curate tasks suitable for bench-marking, human experts design task-specific evaluation functions, review datasets to ensure the absence of privacy concerns, and re-fine task descriptions and skill annotations. Though this process, we obtain 102 benchmark instances from real-world business practices. 

## 5.2 Skill Coverage-Driven Task Generation 

To enhance benchmark coverage, we further incorporate 58 datasets from popular open repositories spanning 10 previously uncovered domains, including 46 Kaggle datasets, 2 UCI ML datasets, 2 Mende-ley datasets, and 8 academic and government datasets (UCSD, BIRD, NatEarth, 2 from NYC TLC, U.S. BTS, NCI GDC, OWID). We select these repositories based on three criteria: (𝑖 ) real-world relevance to prevalent data science domains; (𝑖𝑖 ) inherent complexity, including large-scale data, complex file structures, noisy content, and hetero-geneous formats; and (𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) flexible cross-file associations, such as overlapping semantic topics or joinable attributes (e.g., time, users, countries). We generate tasks with realistic skill compositions absent from the collected tasks. Specifically, we design a skill coverage-driven task generation method. First, we construct a skill graph by merg-ing skill application traces from task solutions collected from Stack Overflow and real practices. The node and edge weights reflect real-world frequencies of skills and their dependencies. Next, to generate a practical task, we prepare key ingredients including real-world datasets, sampled paths from the skill graph, and skill-relevant tasks and solutions as references. Then, we employ a systematic LLM-based pipeline to generate the task, including structured data profiling, workflow synthesis using sampled skills, and task con-struction grounded in the workflow with quality verification. To promote benchmark diversity, we also dynamically reduce sampling weights of previously covered skills and reference examples. Finally, human experts refine the generated tasks to ensure alignment with the skills, and curate corresponding solutions and evaluation meth-ods to produce complete benchmark instances. 

Step 1: Skill Graph Creation. To enhance realism, we simulate real skill compositions by building a skill graph based on aggre-gated skill usage traces from task solutions. Specifically, for Stack Overflow tasks, we trace the extracted skills back to their origi-nal solution steps, and derive skill traces from the step sequences within each solution (see Section 4). For real business tasks from Ant Group, we directly utilize the skill traces obtained in Step 1 of Section 5.1. Based on these skill-annotated task solutions, we con-struct a skill graph where nodes denote skills and edges represent consecutive skill usage in task solutions. Node and edge weights are frequencies of individual skills and ordered skill pairs, respectively. 

Step 2: Task Ingredient Preparation. Before creating a new task, we prepare three necessary ingredients: 

(1) Dataset. We load datasets from the target domain. 

> 6

(2) Skills. We sample a skill composition by drawing a random path from the skill graph. Specifically, the starting node is sampled from skills that appear within the first 10% of steps in some task solutions, with probabilities proportional to node weights. Each subsequent node is sampled from the neighbors of the current node, with probability proportional to a weighted combination of the corresponding edge weight and neighbor node weight. Sampling continues until the path reaches the predefined length. 

(3) Examples. We retrieve representative task-solution pairs relevant to the sampled skills to guide task generation. Specifically, first, for each skill, we assign a relevance score to its annotated steps, defined as the average cosine similarity between the step and other steps annotated with the same skill, plus one to ensure non-negativity. Steps not associated with the skill receive a rele-vance score of zero. Then, given the sampled skills, we compute the relevance score of each task–solution pair by summing the step-wise relevance scores for each skill and aggregating them across all sampled skills. Finally, we sample a predefined number of tasks with probabilities proportional to their aggregated relevance scores, and retain them as examples of skill application. 

Step 3: LLM-based Task Generation. Leveraging the prepared dataset, sampled skills, and skill-related examples, we use LLM to generate new tasks through three stages: 

(1) Structured Data Profiling. We create a data profile for each dataset file to provide structured information to LLMs, consisting of three components: (𝑖 ) Basic Information , which applies to all data files and includes the file path, number of rows, and sampled initial rows; (𝑖𝑖 ) Data Format-Specific Structure , represented as a structured dictionary where each key describes a key attribute of the data file. For example, for tabular data, it includes columns, column types, numerical and categorical columns, missing values, delimiters, and detected header rows determined by textual value ratios or LLM-based distinction between metadata and tabular con-tent; (𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) Relationship , which captures potential join relationships among attributes across data files. Specifically, we first programmat-ically identify attribute names shared across files within the same subfolder. To capture subtler semantic relationships, we prompt LLMs with the data format-specific structure of each file to gener-ate cross-source relationships including fuzzy attribute matches, thematic parallels, and suggested joins. All discovered joins are manually reviewed to ensure the correctness. 

(2) Skill-based Workflow Generation. Since the generated task should require the sampled skills for solution, we first synthesize a solution workflow based on these skills and then generate the task accordingly. (𝑖 ) Initialization. We first sample one skill and its examples, and prompt LLM to generate an actionable step that po-tentially involves multiple correlated data files conditioned on data profiles. If there are too many data files, we cluster files with similar name patterns (e.g., differing only by indices) or tables within the same directory that share schema. We then provide the clustered file paths and a predefined number of representative data profiles to LLM. (𝑖𝑖 ) Skill Iteration. For each remaining sampled skill, we iteratively insert it into the workflow by prompting the LLM to generate a step using the skill, determine its position in the work-flow, and update step dependencies accordingly. After insertion, we require LLM to verify step actionability and dependency coherence. 

Table 2: Statistics Across 15 AgenticDataBench Domains. Domain # Files Data (GB) Per Task Files Data (MB) # Skills                                                                                 

> Real Business Financial 60.1 6.0 89.4 14.3 Loan Model 121 0.03 33.7 24.6 20.8 Loan Risk 39 16.1 1.1 397.5 16.4 Marketing 43.3 4.0 3304.1 18.1 Strategy 40.5 1.0 207.7 12.9 Public Dataset Agriculture 14 0.2 3.7 58.1 27.2 Ecommerce 12 3.1 7.2 2602.4 27.7 Energy 90.1 5.3 73.8 26.7 Entertainment 14 1.0 6.0 93.7 22.3 Healthcare 15 0.2 5.4 38.9 29.5 Real Estate 48 0.4 7.5 64.1 24.8 Sports 18 0.4 4.0 231.0 28.8 Social Network 80.5 3.2 27.3 24.4 Tourism 18 0.04 6.4 37.6 24.5 Transportation 12 1.3 8.9 980.2 27.1 Total 342 27.3 6.4 493.4 23.5

If verification fails, we retry until a predefined failure threshold is reached. If the threshold is exceeded, the skill is discarded. (𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) Ter-mination. We repeat this process until all skills are either integrated into or excluded from the workflow. 

(3) Workflow-based Task Generation. Based on the workflow steps annotated with used skills and data files, we prompt LLM to generate a task description with verification to ensure six quality criteria, including solvability by the workflow, necessity of the skills, conciseness, clarity, actionability, and a verifiable answer. We retain only tasks that pass these verifications. 

(4) Dynamic Sampling Penalty. To enhance diversity among the generated tasks, we first penalize repeated skills by dividing the weights of previously covered nodes and edges by one plus their sampling count. We also apply the same penalization to the relevance scores of previously used task–solution pairs. 

Step 4: Expert Annotation. we establish a systematic annotation pipeline to ensure the quality of generated benchmark instances, in-cluding: (𝑖 ) validating pipeline correctness; (𝑖𝑖 ) identifying missing or redundant data sources in each step; (𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) refining questions to better evaluate skill application; (𝑖𝑣 ) assessing question quality in terms of conciseness, clarity, and domain relevance; (𝑣 ) designing evaluation functions; and (𝑣𝑖 ) implementing ground-truth solutions. We further conduct multiple rounds of cross-validation to ensure annotation consistency and reliability. This pipeline engages 8 ex-perts and requires 960 person-hours , resulting in 242 benchmark instances derived from real-world public datasets. 

## 6 EXPERIMENTS 6.1 Experimental Setup 

All experiments are conducted on a Linux server with 128 GB RAM and a 3.1 GHz CPU. We execute data agents in a Docker environment to ensure safety and consistent evaluation. 

Evaluated Methods. We evaluate state-of-the-art LLMs, including open-source Qwen3.5-397B-A17B, Kimi-K2.5, and the closed-source Claude Sonnet 4.6. We use default temperatures. We evaluate four representative data-agent harnesses: (𝑖 ) DA-Agent [ 28 ], a data sci-ence agent equipped with Bash, Python, and SQL execution tools, reactively invoking tools with execution feedback and a moving 

> 7

Table 3: Representative (TF-IDF) and Challenging (Score) Skills by Domain (DFH: Data Format Handling, DP: Data Preprocessing, DM: Data Manipulation, DA: Data Analysis, DML: Data Modeling, DV: Data Visualization, CS: Cross-Stage Skills). TF-IDF ranks skills by frequency scaled by 𝑙𝑜𝑔 (total tasks /skill tasks ) (the higher, the more frequent); challenging skills are those with the lowest aggregated LLM-assigned scores across domain-relevant tasks (the lower, the more challenging). Domain Representative Skill (TF-IDF) Category Challenging Skill (Score) Category 

Financial Metadata and Documentation Review (64.48) DFH SQL Optimization and Advanced Usage (0.50) CS Query Construction and Execution (34.25) CS Data Transformation and Calculation (0.58) DM Loan Model DataFrame Column Management (6.59) DM Data Comparison and Validation (0.32) DA Model Training and Customization (4.40) DML Statistical Testing for Feature-Target Evaluation (0.34) DA Loan Risk Custom Value Replacement and Correction (6.44) DP Data Preprocessing and Column Management (0.30) DP Helper Functions and Reusable Code (4.83) CS Normalization and Percentile Calculations (0.34) DA Marketing Model Training and Customization (6.29) DML Performance Metrics and Optimization (0.27) CS Performance Benchmarking and Evaluation (4.83) CS Computational Frameworks and Libraries (0.30) CS Strategy Event Tracking and Funnel Analysis (4.03) DA Data Preprocessing and Column Management (0.13) DP Data Preprocessing and Segmentation (2.20) DP Data Preprocessing and Segmentation (0.20) DP Agriculture Entity Mapping and Matching (6.44) DA Probability Modeling and Conversion (0.24) DA Data Exploration and Comparison (5.33) DA Time Series Analysis and Causality (0.25) DA Ecommerce Downsampling and Resampling (8.06) DA Statistical Analysis and Testing (0.11) DA String and Categorical Data Handling (8.05) DM Data Analysis and Visualization (0.23) DV Energy Mapping and Lookup (3.81) DM Normalization and Percentile Calculations (0.28) DA Reshaping and Aggregation (3.22) DA Statistical Modeling and Uncertainty (0.33) DA Entertainment Data Extraction from JSON (3.97) DFH Data Categorization & Mapping (0.27) DM Data Structure and Dictionary Operations (2.64) DA Regression Modeling and Interpretation (0.27) DML Healthcare Special Data Handling and Padding (12.09) DM Incremental and Comparative Calculations (0.25) DA ETL and Data Integration (6.91) DP Time Series and Window Analysis (0.28) DA Real Estate DataFrame Transformation and Reshaping (9.66) DM Correlation Matrix Generation (0.17) DA Date Adjustment and Alignment (6.10) DM Data Manipulation and Validation (0.23) DM Sports ETL and Data Integration (10.69) DP Rolling Statistics and Window-Based Signal Processing (0.20) DA Data Alignment & Merging (7.15) DM Gradient and Derivative Methods (0.26) DM Social Network Encoding and Format Identification (8.79) DFH Mathematical Foundations and Algorithm Understanding (0.20) CS ETL and Data Integration (8.17) DP Validation and Verification of Merge Results (0.27) DA Tourism Excel File Handling and Automation (45.06) DFH Ranking and Top N Logic (0.20) DM Command-Line and Shell Operations (9.30) CS Ranking and Normalization (0.27) DM Transportation Compression and Archiving (62.46) DFH Time Series Analysis and Causality (0.18) DA Time Series Alignment and Matching (36.27) DM Topic Modeling and Evaluation (0.19) DML Financial       

> Loan Model
> Loan Risk
> Marketing
> Strategy
> Agriculture
> Ecommerce
> Energy
> Entertainment
> Healthcare
> Real Estate
> Sports
> Social Network
> Tourism
> Transportation
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> Percentage (%)
> Data Format Handling Data Preprocessing Data Manipulation Data Analysis Data Modeling Data Visualization Cross-Stage Skills

Figure 5: Skill Category Distribution across Domain. 

memory window. We set 80 maximum steps, and retrain the default 15-step history window and 1-minute step-level timeout; (𝑖𝑖 ) Smo-lagents [14 ], a general-purpose ReAct-style agent that iteratively generates and executes code snippets with execution feedback and periodic planning. We cap the number of coding steps at 40 to limit memory growth, and impose a 5-minute per-step timeout to handle unstable Jupyter Kernel Gateway connections; (𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) Claude Code [ 12 ] and CodeX [5], two widely used ReAct-style agent har-nesses supporting long-horizon planning, environment interaction (e.g., Bash, files, and coding), concurrent execution, and automatic context management. We cap execution time at 60 minutes per task with an adaptive step-level timeout mechanism. We pair each harness with each LLM in a compositional manner. 

Diverse Domains. We include 15 real-world data science do-mains. Real-world business domains from Ant Group include: (𝑖 )

Financial , involving cross-table aggregation of fund holdings, re-turns, and financial metrics; (𝑖𝑖 ) Loan Model , covering end-to-end credit risk modeling; (𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) Loan Risk , focusing on post-deployment model monitoring and metric-driven analysis; (𝑖𝑣 ) Marketing , tar-geting conversion rate prediction across businesses; and (𝑣 ) Strat-egy , supporting business decision-making and multi-faceted strat-egy analysis. Public domains include: (𝑣𝑖 ) Agriculture , involving cor-related agricultural environments, production, and markets; (𝑣𝑖𝑖 )

E-commerce , covering products and user behaviors across major platforms; (𝑣𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) Energy , supporting cross-regional and temporal analysis of industrial consumption and energy indicators; (𝑖𝑥 ) En-tertainment , capturing consumption of multimodal entertainment content; (𝑥 ) Healthcare , comprising heterogeneous clinical, biomed-ical, and lifestyle data; (𝑥𝑖 ) Real Estate , integrating housing proper-ties with socio-economic conditions; (𝑥𝑖𝑖 ) Sports , including records 

> 8

Table 4: Scores (%) over AgenticDataBench . SA=Smolagents, DA=DA-Agent, CC=Claude Code, CX=CodeX. ➀=Qwen3.5-397B-A17B, ➁=Kimi-K2.5, ➂=Claude Sonnet 4.6. Domain SA (➀)SA (➁)SA (➂)DA (➀)DA (➁)DA (➂)CC (➀)CC (➁)CC (➂)CX (➀)CX (➁)CX (➂)

Real Business Financial 58.1 61.5 54.9 54.9 65.4 58.6 55.5 64.3 59.1 60.7 66.9 52.9 Loan Model 41.1 42.3 41.2 43.9 43.4 41.6 41.5 42.9 42.5 33.6 40.6 39.7 Loan Risk 72.0 72.9 69.0 70.9 69.7 71.6 74.0 72.7 72.8 58.9 74.0 52.7 Marketing 37.3 43.5 47.5 36.8 33.4 39.4 31.9 35.4 46.2 29.6 32.2 18.9 Strategy 43.1 45.4 45.4 36.3 47.4 50.8 42.9 39.2 48.0 38.2 44.8 34.1 Public Dataset Agriculture 37.9 32.6 40.3 33.3 35.7 31.3 37.1 38.5 37.1 32.9 40.9 21.2 Ecommerce 31.8 27.9 35.8 29.9 28.0 30.4 31.0 30.6 30.0 26.5 36.3 18.1 Energy 63.1 48.9 61.6 59.0 41.3 58.9 54.7 47.1 59.3 51.2 69.0 46.8 Entertainment 69.3 58.9 51.1 63.3 57.2 60.3 46.4 52.0 57.7 29.0 50.7 42.8 Healthcare 33.3 32.6 29.0 26.5 26.4 25.4 32.7 27.8 31.4 28.3 29.9 14.0 Real Estate 22.4 22.9 22.9 19.3 25.0 17.8 14.1 21.0 21.7 18.1 23.3 8.1 Sports 40.6 34.0 39.4 37.1 39.5 43.9 29.0 37.6 42.0 35.4 44.0 25.7 Social Network 59.7 48.6 67.0 58.8 60.1 68.0 45.1 55.3 60.9 59.7 63.3 33.1 Tourism 56.6 53.8 55.9 57.2 55.4 60.4 49.9 49.2 54.5 46.5 56.8 42.0 Transportation 49.9 37.4 46.2 45.8 39.7 44.8 32.7 42.6 45.1 36.3 53.4 34.5 Total 47.1 43.8 46.7 44.4 44.8 46.1 40.9 44.3 46.6 39.9 48.8 31.6 

of teams, matches, and athletes across events; (𝑥𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) Social Network ,reflecting user behaviors and content across different platforms; 

(𝑥𝑖𝑣 ) Tourism , enabling cross-country and travel-related analysis; and (𝑥𝑣 ) Transportation , modeling spatiotemporal mobility patterns in urban systems. 

Datasets and Tasks. AgenticDataBench consists of a total of 344 tasks and 342 data files, amounting to 27.3 GB. As shown in Table 2, our carefully curated data pipeline enables AgenticDataBench to capture the complexity of real-world data science workflows, where each task involves, on average, 6.4 data files, 493.4 MB of data, and 23.5 skill applications. To illustrate skill-level characteristics across domains, we com-pute the ratio of skill categories within each domain, as shown in Figure 5. We also identify the most representative and challenging skills per domain, summarized in Table 3. Representative skills are determined using TF-IDF, calculated as skill frequency scaled by 

log (domain tasks /skill tasks ). Challenging skills are identified by assigning skill application scores via LLM for each task, aggregating them across domain tasks, and selecting the lowest-scoring skills. We find that each domain exhibits distinct skill usage patterns, collectively covering a diverse range of data science task patterns. For example, the Marketing domain emphasizes Data Modeling 

skills, with prevalent use of “Model Training and Customization” to develop diverse models with rich feature representations for predicting key business indicators (e.g., user payment propensity). Table 3 further highlights the most challenging skills in this domain, where computing business metrics (e.g., conversion rates) over com-plex schema and modeling high-dimensional features frequently lead to failures of data agents. In contrast, the Transportation do-main emphasizes Data Manipulation skills, focusing on integrating heterogeneous data through transformations (e.g., “Time Series Alignment and Matching”) to support spatiotemporal analysis. 

Evaluation Metrics. We adopt a two-level evaluation. First, we implement five scoring functions to assess accuracy: table matching, modeling-based scoring, JSON matching, chart matching, and text matching, using Pass@1 by comparing data agent outputs with ground truth, tailored to data format and task type. Second, we perform skill-level analysis by leveraging LLMs to identify misused skills for each task based on annotated skills, revealing failure patterns of data agents. Technical details are provided in Section 3.3. 

## 6.2 Overall Performance Evaluation 

We begin by evaluating each agent’s performance on each dataset, with the overall results summarized in Table 4. 

Agent Harness Comparison. We start by comparing different agent harnesses, and make two key observations. First, among the evaluated data agents, the top three overall performers are CodeX (Kimi-K2.5) , Smolagents (Qwen3.5) , and Smolagents (Claude 4.6) ,suggesting that production-grade agent harnesses currently out-perform the data science-specific DA-Agent . This performance gap arises because DA-Agent adopts a lightweight design with limited engineering optimizations (e.g., a fixed memory horizon) and cur-rently lacks specialized components, such as data profiling tools and data science–specific skills. Second, we find that no agent harness achieves the best score across all domains, indicating that different harnesses have distinct domain-specific advantages. For example, 

Smolagents performs best on the Marketing domain, where many tasks involve large single data files ( ∼1 GB or more). Smolagents 

uses a notebook-based implementation that shares loaded data across steps for improved efficiency. In contrast, other data agents often generate separate files at each step, repeatedly reloading the original data during exploration and execution, which can cause timeouts and sub-optimal performance (see also Figure 9b). Besides, 

DA-Agent can also perform best on the Real Estate domain. This 

> 9

Table 5: Average Metrics per Trajectory by Data Agent. SA=Smolagents, DA=DA-Agent, CC=Claude Code, CX=CodeX. 

➀=Qwen3.5-397B-A17B, ➁=Kimi-K2.5, ➂=Claude Sonnet 4.6. Data Agent # Steps Tokens (K) Cost ($) Success Steps (%) Finish (%) 

SA ( ➀) 18.1 319.4 0.07 94.6 100.0 SA ( ➁) 21.2 379.4 0.26 88.1 100.0 SA ( ➂) 24.0 493.5 1.66 97.0 99.7 DA ( ➀) 20.2 263.0 0.06 95.5 97.4 DA ( ➁) 17.1 145.4 0.11 94.1 98.8 DA ( ➂) 13.6 123.7 0.52 91.9 94.8 CC ( ➀) 28.1 683.4 0.12 93.1 99.7 CC ( ➁) 23.9 530.5 0.32 93.9 99.7 CC ( ➂) 16.8 408.3 0.47 96.7 99.7 CX ( ➀) 26.1 513.2 0.10 91.1 96.8 CX ( ➁) 40.2 1091.2 0.19 59.5 99.7 CX ( ➂) 20.0 218.7 0.76 92.2 88.1 

domain is challenging due to multi-source data alignment and com-plex metric calculations. In this setting, DA-Agent generates large code blocks and achieves relatively high (though still low) scores, whereas other agents iteratively generate small code pieces, leading to inconsistent outputs. 

LLM Comparison. Next, we compare different LLMs within the same agent harness. We find that the LLM achieving the best score varies across the four evaluated agent harnesses. (𝑖 ) Claude 4.6 

performs best within DA-Agent and Claude Code . This advantage is mainly due to the superior coding capabilities of Claude 4.6 ,which result in fewer syntax errors and more efficient, instruction-following code implementations. For example, Claude 4.6 is able to read Parquet files with specified columns, avoiding large-scale data loading and reducing the risk of timeouts. (𝑖𝑖 ) Qwen3.5 performs best within Smolagents . This is because Kimi-K2.5 and Claude 4.6 

are less adaptable to the prompts of Smolagents , causing them to sometimes overlook parts of the instructions (e.g., wrapping code within <code> and </code> ), which leads to repeated parsing errors. 

(𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) Kimi-K2.5 performs best within CodeX . This is because both 

Qwen3.5 and Claude 4.6 are ill-suited to CodeX : Qwen3.5 tends to generate responses misaligned with CodeX (e.g., invalid function parameter errors, large blocks of inefficient code), while Claude 4.6 

frequently stops early without producing a task solution and fails to benefit from auto-compaction of memory (e.g., when the LLM context overflows). 

Cost and Efficiency. We also record trajectory-level statistics, including token consumption and execution efficiency, as shown in Table 5. We make two observations. We have two observations. First, although CodeX (Kimi-K2.5) achieves the highest overall score, it exhibits the largest number of execution steps and the lowest successful-step ratio. This is because CodeX aggressively explores multiple solution paths and relies on rapid execution feedback to iteratively refine its trajectory. Interestingly, although CodeX (Kimi-K2.5) uses more tokens than Smolagents (Kimi-K2.5) , its cost is lower. This is because CodeX is more input-heavy and output-efficient, while output tokens are substantially more expensive than input tokens for Kimi-K2.5 . Second, although Claude 4.6 achieves the best performance within both DA-Agent and Claude Code , it is consis-tently more expensive than the open-source alternatives. We also 20 50 100 500 

> Cost ($)
> 32.5
> 35.0
> 37.5
> 40.0
> 42.5
> 45.0
> 47.5
> Score (%)
> Smolagents
> DA-Agent
> Claude Code
> CodeX
> Qwen3.5
> Kimi-K2.5
> Claude 4.6

Figure 6: Trade-off between Cost and Score. 

observe that Claude Code appears particularly well optimized for Claude models, yielding higher token efficiency and cache utiliza-tion. For example, Claude Code (Claude 4.6) achieves a higher score than Claude Code (Kimi-K2.5) (46.6 vs 43.3) while costing only 1.5 ×

more, compared to 4-6x in other harnesses. We also visualize the trade-off between task score and token cost in Figure 6. We make two observations. First, Smolagents (Qwen3.5) 

and DA-Agent (Qwen3.5) achieve favorable cost-performance trade-offs, attaining moderate task scores at the lowest token costs. This is largely because Qwen3.5 is the least expensive evaluated LLM, while both Smolagents and DA-Agent adopt relatively lightweight orches-trations. Second, Smolagents (Claude 4.6) and CodeX (Claude 4.6) 

exhibit comparatively poor cost-performance trade-offs, incurring substantially higher token costs without proportional score im-provements. This observation is consistent with the LLM–harness mismatch discussed above. Finding 1. General-purpose harnesses achieve higher accuracy via mature components (high cost), e.g., CodeX > Smolagents >

Claude Code > DA-Agent. Smolagents also benefits from cross-step continuity. Higher accuracy generally comes at higher token costs, whereas lightweight harnesses (Smolagents and DA-Agent) can achieve favorable cost-performance trade-offs. 

Finding 2. In terms of token cost, Claude 4.6 incurs much higher token cost than open-source LLMs. In terms of accuracy, the best LLM varies across agent harnesses, emphasizing the adaptivity between LLM and harness (e.g., CodeX (Kimi-K2.5) benefits from more concurrent exploration steps). 

## 6.3 Skill-Level Performance Analysis 

Macro-level aggregate metrics do not reveal fine-grained root causes of data agent performance. To enable deeper analysis of step-wise behaviors, we utilize skill annotations for each AgenticDataBench 

task. Since these skills represent common data-related operational patterns, they provide a breakdown of key steps in end-to-end tasks, enabling the evaluation of individual skill applications to uncover failure patterns in agent performance. Specifically, by comparing data agent solutions with ground truth and leveraging feedback                                                                                                 

> 10 SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Score (%)
> Data Format Handling
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Score (%)
> Data Preprocessing
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Score (%)
> Data Manipulation
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Score (%)
> Data Analysis
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Score (%)
> Data Modeling
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Score (%)
> Data Visualization
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Score (%)
> Cross-Stage Skills
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> SA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> DA
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CC
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> CX
> ()
> 25
> 50
> 75
> 100
> Score (%)
> Overall

Figure 7: Skill Score Comparison across Categories. SA=Smolagents, DA=DA-Agent, CC=Claude Code, CX=CodeX. ➀=Qwen3.5-397B-A17B, ➁=Kimi-K2.5, ➂=Claude Sonnet 4.6. 40 60 80 100 

Score (%) 

Cluster Label Assignment 

Model Training and Inference 

Data Type and Format Conversion 

Preprocessing and File Structure Adjustments 

Statistical Modeling and Uncertainty 

Imputation Methods 

Handling Missing or Edge Cases 

Clustering and Hierarchical Methods 

Classification and Prediction Modeling 

Plot Creation and Configuration 

Model Prediction and Output Handling 

Feature Selection and Dimensionality Reduction 

Strengths    

> 40 60 80 100

Score (%) 

Joining and Lookup Operations 

CTEs and Subqueries 

Dimensionality Reduction Techniques 

Model Training and Inference 

Handling Class Imbalance and Resampling 

Data Collection and Preparation 

Helper Functions and Reusable Code 

Conditional Data Processing 

Summation Techniques 

Command-Line and Shell Operations 

Geospatial Distance Handling 

Row-wise Operations and Aggregation 

Weaknesses 

Smolagents (Qwen3.5) 

Smolagents (Kimi-K2.5) 

Smolagents (Claude 4.6) 

DA-Agent (Qwen3.5) 

DA-Agent (Kimi-K2.5) 

DA-Agent (Claude 4.6) 

Claude Code (Qwen3.5) 

Claude Code (Kimi-K2.5) 

Claude Code (Claude 4.6) 

CodeX (Qwen3.5) 

CodeX (Kimi-K2.5) 

CodeX (Claude 4.6) 

Figure 8: Skill-Level Strengths and Weaknesses of the Top-Performing Agent per Harness: CodeX (Kimi-K2.5) , Smolagents (Qwen3.5) , Claude Code (Claude 4.6) , and DA-Agent (Claude 4.6) .

from evaluation functions, we use LLMs to score each skill applica-tion, where inefficient or incorrect executions receive lower scores aligned with the task evaluation score. For each data agent and skill, we compute the skill score as the average score across all applications, and filter out skills with fewer than three applications to ensure reliability. 

Skill Category Comparison. For each data agent, we aggregate skill scores to compute the average capability for each skill cate-gory, as shown in Figure 7. We have two observations. First, the overall skill scores are broadly consistent with task accuracy scores, supporting the validity of our skill-level evaluation. For example, the relative ranking of LLMs is generally preserved within each agent harness. Second, performance varies substantially across skill categories and data agents. For example, Data Format Handling 

and Cross-Stage Skills generally achieve higher scores, because they are more closely aligned with common coding tasks encountered during pretraining and require less domain-specific data science knowledge. Besides, CodeX (Qwen3.5) performs particularly poorly on Cross-Stage Skills , frequently producing erroneous shell com-mands (“Command-Line & Shell Operations”; see also Figure 8) or failing to recover from missing dependencies (“Dependency Man-agement”). These weaknesses partially explain its low performance on the Tourism domain (see also Table 3). 

Skills of Data Agents. To characterize fine-grained skill profiles, we rank skills by their average score across all agents, weighted by 

1−𝑒 −skill frequency /40 to emphasize frequent skills. The lowest-scoring skills are Data Alignment & Merging , Histogram Creation and Ma-nipulation , and Text Processing and Cleaning , highlighting common limitations in processing heterogeneous and non-relational data. For individual agents, we rank skills by the weighted deviation from the average score of all other agents. Positive and negative values in-dicate strengths and weaknesses, respectively, as shown in Figure 8. Due to space constraints, we report only the top-performing agent from each of the four harnesses, ranked by overall task accuracy. We find that different data agents exhibit distinct strengths and weak-nesses. For example, all agents using Claude 4.6 perform strongly on “Statistical Modeling and Uncertainty”, suggesting that this ca-pability is primarily determined by the underlying LLM. Claude 4.6 

more faithfully follows task instructions and prefers installing and leveraging mature Python packages (e.g., using the t-distribution or ARIMA) over ad hoc implementations. In contrast, all DA-Agent -based agents consistently underperform on “Model Training and     

> 11 (a) Distribution by Data Agent. SA=Smolagents, DA=DA-Agent,
> CC=Claude Code, CX=CodeX. ①=Qwen3.5-397B-A17B, ②=Kimi-
> K2.5, ③=Claude Sonnet 4.6. (b) Distribution by Domain.

Figure 9: Data Agent Failure Distribution. 

Inference”, because its static 1-minute per-step timeout can termi-nate training on high-dimensional feature tables, forcing agents to resort to simpler models. 

Skills of Domains. To differentiate challenging scenarios across domains, we summarize the lowest-scoring skills for each domain in Table 3, and make two observations. First, the lowest-scoring skills differ from the representative skills of the domain, focusing on chal-lenging task execution (e.g., “Time Series Analysis and Causality”) rather than data characteristics (e.g., “Compression and Archiv-ing”). Second, both the skill scores and specific skills vary across domains, reflecting differences in complexity (e.g., the relatively easy Financial domain with high scores) and task patterns. Finding 3. Skill-level strength and weakness varies across agents, domains, and skill categories, partially aligning with task accuracy, with consistent weaknesses in processing heterogeneous and non-relational data overlooked by current harness designs. 

## 6.4 Failure Analysis of Data Agents 

Our empirical analysis of data science tasks identifies ten primary categories of errors in data agent execution: (𝑖 ) Global Limit Ex-ceeded , where the agent exceeds global constraints on maximum steps or total runtime; (𝑖𝑖 ) Single-Step Timeout , where a single-step execution exceeds its time limit; (𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) Self-Repair Failure , where the agent fails to resolve errors from execution feedback; and (𝑖𝑣 )

seven skill-specific error categories corresponding to the seven skill categories. Our analysis results are shown in Figure 9. 

Data Agent Comparison. We compare failure distributions across data agents in Figure 9a and make two observations. First, Data Analysis accounts for the largest proportion of failures, despite not being the most frequently invoked skill category. These fail-ures often arise from data validation, summarization, and statisti-cal calculation, and may further propagate to downstream stages. Second, high rates of Global Limit Exceeded , Single-Step Timeout 

and Self-Repair Failure suggest poor adaptation between LLMs and agent harnesses, consistent with Section 6.2. For example, CodeX (Qwen3.5) exhibits a high rate of Self-Repair Failure , frequently pro-ducing invalid function arguments or Bash commands with minor syntax errors (e.g., missing quotes or whitespace issues). 

Domain Comparison. We compare failure modes across domains in Figure 9b and find that failure distributions vary substantially with data characteristics and task requirements. For example, the 

Marketing domain exhibits the largest share of Global Limit Ex-ceeded and Single-Step Timeout failures, primarily due to repeated loading of large-scale data files ( ∼1 GB). The Healthcare domain shows the highest rate of Self-Repair Failure , as its heterogeneous data formats (e.g., ARFF) frequently trigger file parsing errors. In contrast, the Loan Model domain is most affected by Data Mod-eling failures, owing to its simple file structure (two wide tables) and stronger reliance on complex feature derivation and modeling procedures, which are particularly challenging for current agents. 

Ablation Study on Execution Budgets for “Global Limit Ex-ceeded” and “Single-Step Timeout” Failures. We re-run the failed tasks due to global limit exceed and single-step timeout con-straints, by increasing the global step/runtime limits and the per-step timeout (sampling up to 10 failed tasks), respectively. We find that (𝑖 ) tasks exceeding the global limits account for less than 0.6% of all tasks, and (𝑖𝑖 ) neither intervention significantly improves task scores. Instead, increasing the global limits merely prolongs unpro-ductive execution loops, while increasing the per-step timeout can even mislead agents into less effective reasoning trajectories. Finding 4. Data Analysis contributes the largest share of failures, whereas Global Limit Exceeded, Single-Step Timeout, and Self-Repair Failure reflect LLM–harness misalignment. Failure modes also vary substantially across domains due to differences in data scale, file structure, and task complexity. 

## 7 CONCLUSION 

We propose a comprehensive benchmark for evaluating data agents, named AgenticDataBench , which covers realistic tasks spanning di-verse domains with fine-grained labels. We design a hierarchical skill extraction algorithm that leverages LLM-based semantic refine-ment to perform agglomerative clustering aligned with skill bound-aries. We implement task selection and generation modules to en-sure controlled skill coverage, enabling the inclusion of skill-diverse real-world tasks and realistic task simulations. Finally, through an in-depth empirical study of state-of-the-art data agents, we uncover key insights and identify important open problems to inspire future research. Our contributions pave the way for advancing the capabil-ities of autonomous data-science agents and fostering innovation in dynamic, skill-centered data-science systems. 

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We thank the following contributors for their support in providing and curating the business datasets used in this work: Yuyang Xia, Ziyu Jiang, Yingqi Gao, Xiongfeng Guo, Siyue Liu, Xinyu Li, Fengqin Wei, Xiaochen Liu, Chenlong Li, Haixia Peng, Minzhi Tang, Wenyi Liu, Mengzhen Zhang, Shan Zhang, Jieyuan Chen, Wenyan Liu, Xiuyun Yu, Fan Gou, Linyi Li, Siyu Lv, Shenkang Gu, and Linqi Li. 

> 12

## REFERENCES 

[1] 2026. Agent Skills - Claude API Docs . Retrieved Febrary 11, 2026 from https: //platform.claude.com/docs/en/agents-and-tools/agent-skills/overview [2] 2026. AI-Driven eKYC & Mobile Solutions | Ant Digital Technologies . Retrieved Febrary 11, 2026 from https://antdigital.com/en [3] 2026. Bailian Console of the Large Model Service Platform . Retrieved Febrary 11, 2026 from https://bailian.console.alibabacloud.com/ [4] 2026. Bureau of Transportation Statistics - National Transportation Atlas Database .Retrieved February 11, 2026 from https://geodata.bts.gov/datasets/usdot::means-of-transportation-to-work/about [5] 2026. Codex | AI Coding Partner from OpenAI | OpenAI . Retrieved February 11, 2026 from https://openai.com/codex [6] 2026. Genomic Data Commons - TCGA Pan-Cancer Clinical Data Resource . Re-trieved February 11, 2026 from https://gdc.cancer.gov/about-data/publications/ PanCan-Clinical-2018 [7] 2026. Home - UCI Machine Learning Repository . Retrieved Febrary 11, 2026 from https://archive.ics.uci.edu [8] 2026. Kaggle: Your Machine Learning and Data Science Community . Retrieved Febrary 11, 2026 from https://www.kaggle.com/ [9] 2026. Mendeley Data . Retrieved Febrary 11, 2026 from https://data.mendeley.com/ [10] 2026. Natural Earth - Free Vector and Raster Map Data . Retrieved February 11, 2026 from https://www.naturalearthdata.com/downloads/50m-cultural-vectors/ [11] 2026. Our World in Data - CO2 and Greenhouse Gas Emissions . Retrieved February 11, 2026 from https://github.com/owid/co2-data [12] 2026. Overview - Claude Code Docs . Retrieved February 11, 2026 from https: //code.claude.com/docs/en/overview [13] 2026. Qwen3-Embedding - a Qwen Collection . Retrieved Febrary 11, 2026 from https://huggingface.co/collections/Qwen/qwen3-embedding [14] 2026. smolagents: a barebones library for agents that think in code. Retrieved Febrary 11, 2026 from https://github.com/huggingface/smolagents [15] 2026. Stack Overflow - Where Developers Learn, Share, & Build Careers . Retrieved Febrary 11, 2026 from https://stackoverflow.com [16] 2026. TLC Trip Record Data - New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission .Retrieved February 11, 2026 from https://www.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page [17] Sanjeev Arora and Anirudh Goyal. 2023. A Theory for Emergence of Complex Skills in Language Models. CoRR abs/2307.15936 (2023). arXiv:2307.15936 [18] Kwan Ho Ryan Chan, Yaodong Yu, Chong You, Haozhi Qi, John Wright, and Yi Ma. 2022. ReduNet: A White-box Deep Network from the Principle of Maximizing Rate Reduction. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 23 (2022), 114:1–114:103. [19] Mayee F. Chen, Nicholas Roberts, Kush Bhatia, Jue Wang, Ce Zhang, Frederic Sala, and Christopher Ré. 2023. Skill-it! A data-driven skills framework for understanding and training language models. In NIPS .[20] Ziru Chen, Shijie Chen, Yuting Ning, Qianheng Zhang, Boshi Wang, Botao Yu, Yifei Li, Zeyi Liao, Chen Wei, Zitong Lu, Vishal Dey, Mingyi Xue, Frazier N. Baker, Benjamin Burns, Daniel Adu-Ampratwum, Xuhui Huang, Xia Ning, Song Gao, Yu Su, and Huan Sun. 2025. ScienceAgentBench: Toward Rigorous Assessment of Language Agents for Data-Driven Scientific Discovery. In ICLR .[21] Aniket Didolkar, Anirudh Goyal, Nan Rosemary Ke, Siyuan Guo, Michal Valko, Timothy P. Lillicrap, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Yoshua Bengio, Michael C. Mozer, and Sanjeev Arora. 2024. Metacognitive Capabilities of LLMs: An Exploration in Mathematical Problem Solving. In NIPS .[22] Martin Ester, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Jörg Sander, Xiaowei Xu, et al . 1996. A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in large spatial databases with noise. In 

SIGKDD , Vol. 96. 226–231. [23] Gartner, Inc. 2025. Magic Quadrant for Data Science and Machine Learning Plat-forms . Technical Report. Gartner, Inc. https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/ 6533902 Published May 28, 2025. [24] Jim Gray. 1992. Benchmark Handbook: For Database and Transaction Processing Systems . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA. [25] Ken Gu, Ruoxi Shang, Ruien Jiang, Keying Kuang, Richard-John Lin, Donghe Lyu, Yue Mao, Youran Pan, Teng Wu, Jiaqian Yu, et al . 2024. BLADE: Benchmarking Language Model Agents for Data-Driven Science. In EMNLP . 13936–13971. [26] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al . 2025. Deepseek-r1: Incen-tivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 (2025). [27] Ruilin Hu, Yuyu Luo, Guoliang Li, Shuangqiao Wu, and Yun Luo. 2026. OpenSQL: Data-Efficient Text-to-SQL for Open-Source LLMs via Synthesized Intermediate Supervision. Proc. VLDB Endow (2026). [28] Yiming Huang, Jianwen Luo, Yan Yu, Yitong Zhang, Fangyu Lei, Yifan Wei, Shizhu He, Lifu Huang, Xiao Liu, Jun Zhao, et al . 2024. DA-Code: Agent Data Science Code Generation Benchmark for Large Language Models. In EMNLP .13487–13521. [29] Liqiang Jing, Zhehui Huang, Xiaoyang Wang, Wenlin Yao, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Hongming Zhang, Xinya Du, and Dong Yu. 2025. DSBench: How Far Are Data Science Agents from Becoming Data Science Experts?. In ICLR .[30] Simran Kaur, Simon Park, Anirudh Goyal, and Sanjeev Arora. 2025. Instruct-SkillMix: A Powerful Pipeline for LLM Instruction Tuning. In ICLR .[31] Eugenie Lai, Gerardo Vitagliano, Ziyu Zhang, Om Chabra, Sivaprasad Sudhir, Anna Zeng, Anton A Zabreyko, Chenning Li, Ferdi Kossmann, Jialin Ding, et al .2025. Kramabench: A benchmark for ai systems on data-to-insight pipelines over data lakes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06541 (2025). [32] Hai Lan, Tingting Wang, Zhifeng Bao, Guoliang Li, Daomin Ji, Ge Lee, Feng Luo, Zi Huang, Hailang Qiu, and Gang Hua. 2026. AgenticScholar: Agentic Data Management with Pipeline Orchestration for Scholarly Corpora. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data 4, 3 (SIGMOD (2026), 1–28. [33] Jinyang Li, Binyuan Hui, Ge Qu, Jiaxi Yang, Binhua Li, Bowen Li, Bailin Wang, Bowen Qin, Ruiying Geng, Nan Huo, et al . 2024. Can llm already serve as a database interface? a big bench for large-scale database grounded text-to-sqls. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024). https://bird-bench.github.io/ [34] Shu Liu, Soujanya Ponnapalli, Shreya Shankar, Sepanta Zeighami, Alan Zhu, Shubham Agarwal, Ruiqi Chen, Samion Suwito, Shuo Yuan, Ion Sto-ica, Matei Zaharia, Alvin Cheung, Natacha Crooks, Joseph Gonzalez, and Aditya G. Parameswaran. 2026. Supporting Our AI Overlords: Redesign-ing Data Systems to be Agent-First. In 16th Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research, CIDR 2026, Chaminade, CA, USA, January 18-21, 2026 .www.cidrdb.org. https://vldb.org/cidrdb/2026/supporting-our-ai-overlords-redesigning-data-systems-to-be-agent-first.html [35] Ziming Liu, Yizhou Liu, Eric J. Michaud, Jeff Gore, and Max Tegmark. 2025. Physics of Skill Learning. CoRR abs/2501.12391 (2025). arXiv:2501.12391 [36] Yuyu Luo, Guoliang Li, Ju Fan, and Nan Tang. 2026. Data Agents: Levels, State of the Art, and Open Problems. In Companion of the International Conference on Management of Data . 571–579. [37] Xian Lyu, Chen Lin, Yihang Zheng, Zhifeng Bao, Yiming Zhang, and Guoliang Li. 2026. GenIA: Generative Index Advisor for Dynamic Workloads and Data. 

IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering (2026). [38] Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. 2018. Umap: Uniform man-ifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426 (2018). [39] Eric J. Michaud, Ziming Liu, Uzay Girit, and Max Tegmark. 2023. The Quantiza-tion Model of Neural Scaling. In NIPS .[40] Mazda Moayeri, Vidhisha Balachandran, Varun Chandrasekaran, Safoora Yousefi, Thomas Fel, Soheil Feizi, Besmira Nushi, Neel Joshi, and Vibhav Vineet. 2025. Un-earthing Skill-level Insights for Understanding Trade-offs of Foundation Models. In ICLR .[41] Fionn Murtagh and Pedro Contreras. 2012. Algorithms for hierarchical clustering: an overview. Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: data mining and knowledge discovery 

2, 1 (2012), 86–97. [42] George L Nemhauser, Laurence A Wolsey, and Marshall L Fisher. 1978. An analy-sis of approximations for maximizing submodular set functions—I. Mathematical programming 14, 1 (1978), 265–294. [43] Jianmo Ni, Jiacheng Li, and Julian McAuley. 2019. Justifying recommendations using distantly-labeled reviews and fine-grained aspects. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) .188–197. https://cseweb.ucsd.edu/~jmcauley/datasets/amazon_v2/ [44] Jinxiu Qu, Zirui Tang, Hongzhang Huang, Boyu Niu, Wei Zhou, Jiannan Wang, Yitong Song, Guoliang Li, Xuanhe Zhou, and Fan Wu. 2026. ST-Raptor: An Agentic System for Semi-Structured Table QA. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.07034 

(2026). [45] Parth Sarthi, Salman Abdullah, Aditi Tuli, Shubh Khanna, Anna Goldie, and Christopher D Manning. 2024. RAPTOR: Recursive Abstractive Processing for Tree-Organized Retrieval. In ICLR .[46] Shreya Shankar, Tristan Chambers, Tarak Shah, Aditya G Parameswaran, and Eugene Wu. 2025. DocETL: Agentic Query Rewriting and Evaluation for Complex Document Processing. VLDB 18, 9 (2025), 3035–3048. [47] Shreya Shankar, Sepanta Zeighami, and Aditya Parameswaran. 2026. Task Cascades for Efficient Unstructured Data Processing. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data 4, 1 (SIGMOD (2026), 1–26. [48] Ji Sun, Guoliang Li, Peiyao Zhou, Yihui Ma, Jingzhe Xu, and Yuan Li. 2025. Agenticdata: An agentic data analytics system for heterogeneous data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05002 (2025). [49] Zhaoyan Sun, Jiayi Wang, Xinyang Zhao, Jiachi Wang, and Guoliang Li. 2025. Data agent: A holistic architecture for orchestrating data+ ai ecosystems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01599 (2025). [50] Zhaoyan Sun, Xuanhe Zhou, Guoliang Li, Xiang Yu, Jianhua Feng, and Yong Zhang. 2025. R-Bot: An LLM-Based Query Rewrite System. VLDB 18, 12 (2025), 5031–5044. [51] Zhaoyan Sun, Xuanhe Zhou, Jianming Wu, Wei Zhou, and Guoliang Li. 2025. D-Bot: An LLM-Powered DBA Copilot. In SIGMOD Companion . 235–238. [52] Zirui Tang, Xuanhe Zhou, Yumou Liu, Linchun Li, Yukai Wu, Weizheng Wang, Hongzhang Huang, Wei Zhou, Jun Zhou, Jiachen Song, Shaoli Yu, Jinqi Wang, Zihang Zhou, Hongyi Zhou, Yuting Lv, Jinyang Li, Jiashuo Liu, Ruoyu Chen, Chunwei Liu, GuoLiang Li, Jihua Kang, and Fan Wu. 2026. Workspace-Bench 

> 13

1.0: Benchmarking AI Agents on Workspace Tasks with Large-Scale File Depen-dencies. arXiv:2605.03596 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.03596 [53] Jiayi Wang and Jianhua Feng. 2025. Unify: An unstructured data analytics system. In ICDE . IEEE, 4662–4674. [54] Kuncan Wang, Ziting Wang, Peizhuo Lv, Haoyang Li, Guoliang Li, Gao Cong, and Wei Dong. 2026. Data Agents Under Attack: Vulnerabilities in LLM-Driven Analytical Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.08661 (2026). [55] Jingzhe Xu, Rui Wang, Jiannan Wang, and Guoliang Li. 2026. PrepBench: How Far Are We from Natural-Language-Driven Data Preparation? arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.08687 (2026). [56] Shihui Xu, Jiayi Wang, and Guoliang Li. 2026. Bridging the Gap: Cardinality Estimation for Semantic Queries on Unstructured Data. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data 4, 3 (SIGMOD (2026), 1–26. [57] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al . 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 (2025). [58] Dingli Yu, Simran Kaur, Arushi Gupta, Jonah Brown-Cohen, Anirudh Goyal, and Sanjeev Arora. 2024. SKILL-MIX: a Flexible and Expandable Family of Evaluations for AI Models. In ICLR .[59] Aohan Zeng, Xin Lv, Zhenyu Hou, Zhengxiao Du, Qinkai Zheng, Bin Chen, Da Yin, Chendi Ge, Chengxing Xie, Cunxiang Wang, et al . 2026. GLM-5: from Vibe Coding to Agentic Engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15763 (2026). [60] Dan Zhang, Sining Zhoubian, Min Cai, Fengzu Li, Lekang Yang, Wei Wang, Tianjiao Dong, Ziniu Hu, Jie Tang, and Yisong Yue. 2025. Datascibench: An llm agent benchmark for data science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13897 (2025). [61] Yuxin Zhang, Meihao Fan, Ju Fan, Mingyang Yi, Yuyu Luo, Guoliang Li, Bin Wu, and Wenchao Zhou. 2026. Reward-SQL: Boosting Text-to-SQL via Stepwise Execution-Aware Reasoning and Process-Supervised Rewards. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data 4, 3 (SIGMOD (2026), 1–27. [62] Wei Zhou, Yuyang Gao, Xuanhe Zhou, and Guoliang Li. 2025. Cracking SQL barriers: An llm-based dialect translation system. Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data 3, 3 (2025), 1–26. [63] Wei Zhou, Yuyang Gao, Xuanhe Zhou, and Guoliang Li. 2026. CrackSQL: A Hybrid Dialect Translation System Powered by LLM. In Companion of the Inter-national Conference on Management of Data . 154–157. [64] Wei Zhou, Peng Sun, Xuanhe Zhou, Qianglei Zang, Ji Xu, Tieying Zhang, Guo-liang Li, and Fan Wu. 2025. Dbaiops: A reasoning llm-enhanced database operation and maintenance system using knowledge graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.01136 (2025). [65] Wei Zhou, Jun Zhou, Haoyu Wang, Zhenghao Li, Qikang He, Shaokun Han, Guoliang Li, Xuanhe Zhou, Yeye He, Chunwei Liu, et al . 2026. Can LLMs Clean Up Your Mess? A Survey of Application-Ready Data Preparation with LLMs. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.17058 (2026). [66] Wei Zhou, Xuanhe Zhou, Shaokun Han, Hongming Xu, Guoliang Li, Zhiyu Li, Feiyu Xiong, and Fan Wu. 2026. Are We Ready For An Agent-Native Memory System? arXiv:2606.24775 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.24775 [67] Wei Zhou, Xuanhe Zhou, Qikang He, Guoliang Li, Bingsheng He, Quanqing Xu, and Fan Wu. 2026. Automating Database-Native Function Code Synthesis with LLMs. CoRR abs/2604.06231 (2026). https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2604.06231 arXiv:2604.06231 [68] Xuanhe Zhou, Guoliang Li, Zhaoyan Sun, Zhiyuan Liu, Weize Chen, Jianming Wu, Jiesi Liu, Ruohang Feng, and Guoyang Zeng. 2024. D-Bot: Database Diagnosis System using Large Language Models. VLDB 17, 10 (2024), 2514–2527. [69] Xuanhe Zhou, Zhaoyan Sun, and Guoliang Li. 2024. Db-gpt: Large language model meets database. Data Science and Engineering 9, 1 (2024), 102–111.