Title: CLI-Anything: Towards Agent-Native Computer Use

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.03854v1

Published Time: Wed, 03 Jun 2026 01:36:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
# CLI-Anything: Towards Agent-Native Computer Use 

Yuhao Yang, Tianyu Fan, Chao Huang University of Hong Kong 

Abstract 

As large language models advance in reasoning and tool use capabilities, researchers increasingly seek to leverage them for computer use agents that can interact with existing software. The dominant approach develops GUI agents that control applications through visual interfaces—interpreting screenshots, locating UI elements, and executing mouse clicks to mimic human interaction. This GUI-centric paradigm fundamentally misaligns with agent capabilities. Current GUI agents struggle with brittle pixel-level interactions, timing dependencies, and coordinate-based actions that break with interface changes. They force agents to emulate human perceptual limitations rather than leverage their computational strengths in structured data processing and programmatic control. CLI-Anything argues for agent-native computer use design. Instead of forcing agents to navigate visual layouts, we create interfaces aligned with how agents naturally operate—through structured commands, explicit state representations, and deterministic feedback. We transform existing applications into command-line harnesses that preserve functionality while exposing machine-readable protocols optimized for AI-native interaction. This eliminates the lossy visual-to-computational translation that plagues GUI agents. Rather than building sophisticated screen readers and click simulators, we should redesign interaction paradigms around agent strengths: precise programmatic control and deterministic execution. We examine the methodology, architecture, evidence, and future directions for this agent-native transformation of computer use. We have built CLI-Hub as a comprehensive platform that operationalizes this agent-native computer use vision. The platform provides methodology, architecture, and infrastructure for this fundamental transformation of computer use. CLI-Anything is available at: https://github.com/HKUDS/CLI-Anything. CLI-Hub is available at: https://clianything.cc. 

## 1 Introduction 

Agents are increasingly evaluated in settings that require tool use, long-horizon state, executable feedback, and artifact construction. Early agent work made reasoning-action loops and tool calls explicit [ 4, 5 ]. API systems and benchmarks made tool selection and argument construction measurable [ 6 , 7 , 8]. Coding-agent environments then made success observable through repository tests [ 12 , 13 ]. Web and desktop environments extended the same pressure to task-state checks [ 14 , 18 ]. Work on reflection and open-ended agents shows why persistent memory and recovery matter over long trajectories [ 26 , 27 ]. Recent agentic model work follows the same direction: Qwen3-Coder-Next frames coding agents around verifiable tasks paired with executable environments [ 1]; DeepSeek-V3.2 highlights large-scale agentic task synthesis and tool-use training [ 2 ]; and Kimi K2.5 introduces multimodal agentic workflows and a parallel Agent Swarm [ 3]. Together, these works point toward an operational constraint for agent systems: agents learn and improve when work is grounded in environments that can execute, check, and return structured feedback. 

CLI-Anything approaches the same constraint as a foundational software-interface problem. It asks what interface real software should expose to agents once clicking through the application becomes the wrong abstraction. The core claim is simple: software artifacts should be created, inspected, rendered,                        

> arXiv:2606.03854v1 [cs.HC] 2 Jun 2026 CLI-Anything 1Introduction
> Paper term Repository location Role in the system
> Harness-generation SOP cli-anything-plugin/HARNESS.md Method for lifting GUI applications into stateful CLIs. Shared read-eval-print loop (REPL) shell
> cli-anything-plugin/repl_skin. py
> Common terminal interaction layer copied into generated harnesses. Generated harness <software>/agent-harness/ Independent Python package for one lifted application. Blender harness blender/agent-harness/cli_anyth ing/blender/
> Case-study implementation used for scene, render, preview, and artifact validation. Backend execution wrapper .../utils/<software>_backend.py Locates the real application, invokes it, and checks backend-produced artifacts. Scene-contract lowering pass blender/.../utils/bpy_gen.py Converts the Blender JSON scene contract into executable bpy .Backend-gated end-to-end (E2E) suite
> .../tests/test_full_e2e.py Exercises real software, subprocess entry points, native files, and rendered outputs. Companion skills for CLIs skills/ Agent-readable usage surfaces generated after the harness and preview contract are known.
> CLI-Hub installer cli-hub/cli_hub/installer.py Normalizes pip, npm, uv, bundled, and command-based installation paths. Catalog registries registry.json ,public_registry. json
> Distribution metadata that lets agents find, install, and invoke interfaces through CLI-Hub .

Table 1: Repository map for terms used throughout the report. Later sections refer to components by role and use paths only when needed for reproducibility. 

verified, and replayed through the same explicit boundary whenever that boundary exists. A GUI may remain useful as a fallback and as a human display surface. For many LLM-agent workflows, it is the wrong default control surface. GUIs are well designed for humans [ 23 ]. They compress state into pixels, rely on pointing and focus, hide the underlying project graph, and assume continuous perception. Agents need different properties: stable verbs, explicit state, JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) output, durable history, programmatic validation, installable tools, and a way to discover the right interface at task time. A stateful CLI harness acts as an agent-facing contract that delegates final truth to the real application whenever possible. This report contributes four things. First, it states the interface thesis behind CLI-Anything :professional applications need agent-facing contracts that sit above their real backends. Second, it grounds the thesis in implemented system evidence: harness generation, preview protocol, skill generation, and CLI-Hub distribution. Third, it situates CLI-Anything within related work on verifiable environments and tool-use training [ 1 , 2, 8]. It also connects to executable app benchmarks and multimodal agentic workflows [ 9, 10 , 3 ]: those workloads require software interfaces that are more structured than pixels. Fourth, it identifies limits and future work: broader preview coverage, agent-first 

CLI-Hub APIs, an experimental scenario-level CLI Matrix, and benchmarkable artifact tasks. 

> 2

CLI-Anything 2 Context: Agentic Models and Agent-Native Interfaces Interface Boundary      

> Move the agent's attention from screen mechanics to artifact semantics.
> Screen mechanics Artifact semantics lift boundary Human GUI
> menus click targets focus changes dialog timing
> Friction fi eld
> moving toolbars modal focus platform drift uncertain state
> Agent contract
> verbs project state JSON replies preview + replay
> Software substrate
> native fi les backend binaries render/export structured outputs
> reveals friction contract lift delegate truth

Lesson Keep software-speci fi c nouns. 

> Standardize the operational contract around commands, durable state, preview artifacts, and replayable veri fi cation.
> Verify exported artifacts, not window motion.

Figure 1: The interface boundary. GUI control asks agents to imitate a human operator. A lifted harness moves the control point toward native state, command systems, renderers, APIs, and project formats while keeping the real software in the loop. 

## 2 Context: Agentic Models and Agent-Native Interfaces 

Four strands of agent research put pressure on the software interface. Coding agents assume an executable workspace with files, tests, and package tools [ 1 , 12 , 13 ]. Tool-use training and API-oriented benchmarks study whether models can select a capability and call it with the right arguments [ 2, 5, 6 , 7 , 8 ]. Stateful app-world benchmarks add databases, policies, simulated users, and multi-application workflows [ 9, 10 ]. Multimodal and computer-use benchmarks keep the visual channel in view: web pages, mobile apps, desktop apps, and long tool-call workflows. Kimi K2.5 represents the multimodal model-report side [ 3]; VisualWebArena, AndroidWorld, OSWorld, and AppAgent represent benchmark settings where screen state and real applications are central [15, 19, 18, 22]. 

CLI-Anything belongs to the environment layer required by this line of work. If a model is trained or evaluated with executable feedback, the environment must expose an operation boundary. For coding, that boundary is often a repository, a shell, a test suite, and a package manager [ 12 , 13 ]. For professional software, the boundary is less standardized: an office suite, a CAD tool, a graphics application, a video editor, a browser, or a debugger may hide its useful state behind GUI actions. Early web-agent work exposes this problem in open-domain and shopping settings [ 21 , 28 ]. Later web and enterprise benchmarks make the browser state more realistic and task-specific [ 14 , 16 , 17 ]. Visual web and mobile benchmarks show the same issue when pixels and gestures carry part of the state [ 15 , 19 , 22 ]. OSWorld extends the setting to arbitrary desktop applications [18]. The practical question becomes: can we give agents the same style of executable environment for non-code software that they already have for code? CLI-Anything is one answer. Each harness turns 

3CLI-Anything 3 Methodology         

> Related-work pat-tern Model-side role CLI-Anything analogue
> Executable environ-ments Training and evaluation tasks can be run and checked. Harness commands mutate real project state and expose inspection com-mands. Verifiable rewards Feedback is grounded in tests, tools, or outcome checks. E2E tests validate native formats, magic bytes, rendered pixels, timelines, and exports. Tool-use trajectories Agents interleave reasoning and ac-tions over long horizons. REPL/session state, undo/redo, pre-view bundles, and trajectory logs per-sist intermediate work. Agent orchestration Complex work decomposes into special-ized tool calls or subagents.
> CLI-Hub organizes installable har-nesses today; CLI Matrix is an exper-imental direction for scenario-level organization.
> Table 2: Related agentic systems motivate a software-interface layer. CLI-Anything supplies explicit environments for real applications and avoids making GUI pixels the primary execution substrate.

an application into a stateful tool with a command tree, a project/session representation, backend invocation, tests, and agent-readable documentation. The interface is local to the software domain; the contract is shared with the broader tool-use literature: invoke commands, inspect state, render or export through the real backend, verify outputs, and recover from errors. Tool-use work studies command selection and API invocation itself [ 4 , 5 , 6]. API-Bank and Gorilla focus more directly on API-call coverage and correctness [ 8 , 7 ]; reflection work shows how agents can use feedback from failed attempts [26]. 

## 3 Methodology 

3.1 The Harness Lift Methodology 

The harness-generation SOP in Table 1 is the central methodology. The lifecycle follows the same causal order as the abstract: discover the application’s backend contract, build a stateful harness around that contract, publish truthful previews from the real backend, generate the agent-readable skill, and distribute the interface through CLI-Hub . It begins with interface archaeology: the builder identifies the backend engine, maps GUI actions to API calls or command systems, finds the native data model, searches for existing CLI tools, and studies undo/redo or command patterns. This step determines whether the harness should manipulate XML, JSON, ODF packages, MLT timelines, SVG graphs, REST APIs, or a native scripting API. This emphasis on designing the agent-computer interface follows the same broad lesson as SWE-agent: interface affordances materially affect agent performance on interactive software tasks [13]. The second phase designs a dual-mode CLI. Every generated harness should work as both a stateful REPL and a one-shot subcommand tool. It should define command groups around the domain model of the software: projects, layers, pages, tracks, clips, filters, parts, scenes, exports, captures, notes, or requests. The common shape comes from the operational contract: project management, mutation, inspection, import/export, configuration, session state, and errors that an agent can understand. 

> 4

CLI-Anything 3 Methodology Harness Lift Pipeline 

The repeatable path from interface archaeology to a reusable agent skill.   

> Observe the native work fl ow Lift it into an agent contract 01

Locate   

> Trace fi les Find backend calls Identify rendered output
> evidence, not clicks 02

Model  

> Name domain nouns Map operations Record constraints
> semantic surface 03

Design  

> Command grammar JSON responses Recoverable errors
> machine contract 04

Implement  

> Project state Session replay Undo / redo hooks
> durable behavior 05

Render  

> Call real backend Export artifacts Build previews
> truth boundary 06

Verify  

> Unit tests E2E checks File and pixel probes
> proof loop 07

Publish 

> Generate SKILL.md Register metadata Expose install path
> portable skill Artifact-backed execution and review

Input evidence  

> Changed fi les Backend invocation User-visible artifact

Harness surface 

> Commands + JSON Stateful sessions Preview manifest

Portable layer 

> Generated skill Registry metadata Install + launch path Quality bar: verify the artifact the user will actually open, not only that a command returned zero.

Figure 2: The harness lift pipeline. The generated CLI is a new control surface above native state and backend execution. 

The implementation phase then starts from the data layer, adds probes before mutations, wraps the real backend, and adds rendering/export. The SOP is explicit that the real software is a hard dependency for rendering and export. The harness should use tools such as libreoffice –headless , blender –background , melt , ffmpeg , inkscape , sox , native scripting, or service APIs, while avoiding Python imitations of the application. The GIMP backend execution wrapper, for example, finds a real GIMP executable, runs Script-Fu in batch mode, and raises an error when the expected output file is missing. 

Backend export guard 

for name in ("gimp", "gimp-2.10", "gimp-2.99"): path = shutil.which(name) if path: return path raise RuntimeError("GIMP is not installed...") cmd = [gimp, "-i", "-b", script, "-b", "(gimp-quit 0)"] result = subprocess.run(cmd, capture_output=True, text=True) if not os.path.exists(abs_output): raise RuntimeError("GIMP export produced no output file") 

The harness also exposes machine-readable output. The standard pattern is a Click group with 

invoke_without_command=True , a project path, a dry-run mode, and –json for JSON responses. When invoked without a subcommand, the tool enters the REPL. This gives agents a stable command entry point and gives humans a familiar terminal surface. The pattern is deliberately close to tool-

5CLI-Anything 3 Methodology 

use agent work in which models interleave language reasoning with explicit actions over an external environment [ 4, 5 ]. It also follows API-oriented work where correct tool selection and argument construction are measured directly [6, 7, 8]. 

3.2 A Minimal Agent-Native Software Contract 

A harness can be described as a contract H = ( S, C, I, R, V, D ) over a real software backend. S is the persistent state space: project files, session files, undo history, live preview state, and any native artifacts needed to reopen the work. C is the command vocabulary: domain-specific mutations and probes exposed through Click subcommands and the REPL. I is the inspection surface: JSON status, list, info, schema, history, and preview-summary commands. R is the rendering/export relation, which delegates to the real software or its native backend tools. V is the verification layer: unit tests, E2E tests, subprocess tests, file-format checks, pixel/media checks, and backend-gated assertions. D is the discovery layer: SKILL.md , registry metadata, install strategy, entry point, and CLI-Hub records. The contract therefore joins work on API/tool invocation with work on executable agent environments. Tool-use work treats commands and APIs as callable actions with arguments [ 4 , 5 , 6 ]. API-centered benchmarks and systems stress call correctness and API coverage [ 7 , 8 ]. App-world and user-agent-tool benchmarks add persistent application state and policy constraints [ 9 , 10 ]. Agent-computer-interface work and tool protocols make the surrounding environment design explicit [13, 11]. This contract is useful because it separates software-specific semantics from agent-facing invariants. A Blender scene, a Draw.io graph, a LibreOffice document, and a FreeCAD assembly have different state spaces and command vocabularies. A useful agent-native interface should still satisfy the same invariants: 1. Explicit state. The current workspace must be named, saved, and inspectable. Hidden GUI focus cannot be the sole source of truth. 2. Typed actions. Commands should map to domain operations, with mouse gestures kept as fallback implementation details. They should fail with actionable errors. 3. Cheap inspection. Agents should be able to ask what changed before committing to the next step. 4. Backend truth. Final render/export should use the real software or an honest native backend path. 5. Programmatic verification. The harness should check the artifact that a user will open, including the intermediate file and process return code only as supporting evidence. 6. Discoverability. An agent should be able to find, install, read, and invoke the interface from structured metadata. The contract also clarifies when GUI automation remains necessary. If S is opaque, C cannot be mapped to native operations, R is unavailable in headless mode, or V cannot observe the result except through pixels, then a harness may need accessibility, GUI scripting, or screen control. CLI-Anything 

is strongest where the software already contains enough inspectable machinery to make H meaningful. Its claim has a precise scope: when the backend, file format, command model, renderer, or API can be lifted, agents should use that lifted contract first. Earlier web-agent work studied open-domain and shopping settings [ 21 , 28 ]; later web and enterprise benchmarks add realistic sites and knowledge-work workflows [ 14 , 16 , 17 ]. Visual and mobile-agent work remains important where pixels, gestures, and app screens are the available control surface [ 15 , 19 , 20 , 22 ]. Desktop benchmarks such as OSWorld cover applications where arbitrary GUI state still matters [ 18 ]. Earlier GUI automation systems showed that screenshot search and pixel-based interface recovery can be useful when structure is unavailable [ 24 , 25 ]. 

> 6

CLI-Anything 3 Methodology Veri fi cation / Execution Symmetry      

> When artifacts are structured, the checker points to the right builder boundary.
> Execution builder
> commands choose state backend writes fi les session records lineage exports target artifact
> Structured artifact boundary
> the shared surface both sides can trust
> OOXML / SVG / MLT / JSON Rendered outputs Source fi ngerprints Package metadata Veri fi cation checker
> parse package count semantic objects test pixels / exports compare metadata
> write artifact read artifact diagnose, revise, re-export Symmetry rule If veri fi cation proves truth at a fi le/package boundary, execution should build and export at that same boundary.

Figure 3: Verification/execution symmetry. When commands and checks share the same artifact boundary, agents can build, inspect, render, verify, and replay without switching to a pixel-only mental model. 

3.3 Verification Becomes Execution 

Many GUI computer-use tasks create an artificial asymmetry. The final artifact is structured and easy to inspect, while the construction path is framed as pixel observation and clicking. A spreadsheet can be parsed. A slide deck is a package. A diagram is XML. A video editor timeline has tracks and timecodes. A CAD project has geometry, constraints, and exportable views. If the artifact can be inspected programmatically, then in many cases it can also be constructed programmatically. This is the software-artifact analogue of the move from static benchmark answers to executable environments in coding, web, and desktop-agent evaluation. Coding benchmarks use repositories and tests as validators [ 12 , 13 ]; web and enterprise benchmarks use browser or service state [ 14 , 16 , 17 ]; desktop benchmarks use OS-level setup and execution-based checks [ 18 ]. CLI-Anything extends the same argument to artifact-producing desktop software: when the success condition is a file, render, database state, or inspectable project graph, the construction interface should expose that state directly instead of forcing every step through visual manipulation. 

CLI-Anything restores symmetry by making the construction and verification surfaces meet at the same artifact boundary. A Draw.io harness can create shapes and connectors, then tests can parse the resulting mxfile . A LibreOffice harness can construct ODF state, export through headless LibreOffice, and verify PDF or OOXML output. A video harness can mutate MLT state, render through the real backend, and verify duration, frames, or media properties. This is why the testing rules in the SOP are strict: unit tests and process exit codes provide incomplete evidence on their own. The repository encodes this principle in test requirements. Harnesses should test core functions with synthetic data, then run E2E tests that generate real files, call real software, and verify the output that a user would open. The SOP specifically calls for magic-byte checks, ZIP structure validation for 

7CLI-Anything 3 Methodology 

OOXML, pixel-level analysis for video/images, audio analysis, duration checks, and CLI subprocess tests against installed commands. This makes tests part of interface design. A weak harness only says “the command returned zero.” A stronger harness says “the command generated the project, the backend rendered it, and the output has the expected structure or observable content.” The same lesson appears in related work on agentic coding and tool use: Qwen3-Coder-Next uses executable coding tasks because coding-agent behavior needs executable feedback [ 1]. DeepSeek-V3.2 synthesizes tool environments because robust agent behavior needs interactive feedback [ 2]. CLI-Anything applies the same logic to real applications: artifacts should be executable, checkable, and visible through a trustworthy output path. 

3.4 State Is the Agent Workspace 

Stateless shell commands help with isolated calls. Serious agent workflows need more continuity. An agent may need to open a project, add objects, inspect the state, preview a change, undo a failed attempt, revise parameters, export, and cite the final artifact. A human GUI carries continuity through windows, selections, recent files, focus, visual memory, and unsaved state. A command-line agent needs the same continuity represented as files, history, and commands. This requirement is consistent with prior agent work that treats state, environment feedback, memory, and executable skills as central to long-horizon behavior [4, 26, 27]. 

CLI-Anything harnesses therefore make state a first-class surface. JSON project files give agents an inspectable workspace. Session files record current project paths and modification state. Undo/redo stacks make exploration recoverable. Dry-run modes help agents test plans before mutation. Deter-ministic JSON makes diffing useful. File locking prevents concurrent writes from corrupting a session. The FreeCAD session implementation is a representative example: it saves undo snapshots, maintains redo history, tracks modification state, and persists JSON under an exclusive lock when the platform supports it. 

> Session undo snapshot
> entry = { "timestamp": time.time(), "description": description, "state": copy.deepcopy(self.project), }self._undo_stack.append(entry) self._redo_stack.clear() self._modified = True

This state model gives the CLI the qualities of a desktop session without requiring the desktop. It also changes how agents can recover. A screenshot leaves the agent inferring whether a change succeeded; the harness lets it ask for session status –json , inspect the project graph, list history, undo, or render a preview bundle. The workspace for agents becomes a state graph with executable transitions and inspectable history. The difference from a plain command wrapper is that the CLI itself becomes an agent workspace with memory, recovery, and feedback loops, far beyond a thin process invocation surface [26, 27, 13]. 

> 8

CLI-Anything 3 Methodology Preview as Display Protocol  

> A shared visual feedback loop without giving up backend truth.
> Preview directory protocol A small state bundle carries backend facts into shared visual surfaces for agents and people.

Producer CLI  

> preview command backend render recipe metadata source fi ngerprint
> backend truth writes once

Preview state bundle 

> stable display contract, not an ad hoc screenshot
> manifest.json
> contract + schema
> summary.json
> compact semantic view
> artifacts/
> rendered display outputs
> session.json
> current project state
> trajectory.json
> command replay trail
> fi ngerprints
> source and export truth

Consumer views  

> cli-hub preview inspect JSON html / watch open or attach
> reads without mutating state publish read-only

Agent context 

> compact summary selected artifacts next prompt evidence

Traceability spine command fi ngerprint artifact 

> Replay links source command to exported preview.

Human review  

> same rendered state same trajectory same source fi ngerprint Protocol value: every reader sees the same preview while backend artifacts remain the source of truth.

Figure 4: Preview as display protocol. Harnesses publish preview bundles and live-session state; CLI-Hub 

reads that state as a generic viewer. 

3.5 Preview as the Display Protocol 

Agents still need visual feedback. Humans still need to inspect outputs. The open question is the contract that carries intermediate rendered state. Multimodal GUI agents and desktop benchmarks show why visual state remains important and why it needs reliable task context plus execution-grounded evaluation. VisualWebArena isolates visually grounded web tasks [ 15 ]; AndroidWorld and Android in the Wild expose mobile device-control settings [ 19 , 20 ]; OSWorld studies arbitrary desktop applications [ 18 ]; and AppAgent studies smartphone-app use through multimodal interaction [ 22 ]. CLI-Anything 

separates preview from GUI streaming. The preview protocol defines a stable on-disk bundle with 

manifest.json , summary.json , and an artifacts/ directory containing images, clips, JSON dumps, models, or other inspection artifacts. Live workflows add session.json for the mutable current head and trajectory.json for append-only command-to-preview history. The producer/consumer split is crucial. A software harness publishes preview state through 

cli-anything-<software> preview ... . It owns the real backend, source fingerprinting, recipes, and truthful artifact generation. CLI-Hub consumes already-published state with cli-hub previews inspect , html , watch , and open . It reads preview bundles without rendering or mutating the project. This keeps domain truth inside the harness and keeps viewing generic across CAD, video, 3D, GPU captures, and diagrams. The current implementation includes 5 preview-capable helper integrations: Shotcut, Openscreen, Blender, FreeCAD, and RenderDoc. FreeCAD and Blender are the strongest demonstrations because they produce trajectories where each command is tied to a real preview state. The same mechanism serves agents as much as human demos: mutate the project, publish a preview, inspect a compact summary or rendered artifact, and continue from a known state. 

9CLI-Anything 3 Methodology               

> Ecosystem coverage signal Current value Why it matters
> Harness catalog entries 65 Agent-facing interfaces for generated and con-tributed harnesses. Public third-party CLI entries 18 External CLIs normalized under the same discov-ery/install layer. Companion skills for CLIs 61 Machine-readable usage surfaces for agents and humans. Harness catalog categories 29 Capability browsing beyond package names. Public catalog categories 11 Mixed install strategies and external tool coverage. Preview-capable integrations 5Early cross-harness display protocol adoption.
> Table 3: Current production snapshot for catalog and discovery coverage.

Truthfulness is the central design constraint. The protocol explicitly rejects toy renderers and GUI screen scraping as a source of preview truth. A preview should be a cheap intermediate view of the real project or capture state. If a helper camera, light, or temporary rig is inserted for visualization, the bundle should mark and explain that limitation. Trustworthy preview quality matters most. In this sense, preview is an inspectable display protocol for executable environments that continues to rely on the underlying software’s renderer or state model. This keeps the visual evidence needed by multimodal web and mobile agents [ 15 , 19 , 22 ], while preserving execution-grounded desktop state as emphasized by OSWorld [18]. 

3.6 Discovery, Distribution, and CLI-Hub 

A CLI harness is incomplete if an agent cannot discover it, install it, read its capabilities, and recover from installation or backend errors. This is why CLI-Anything treats SKILL.md and CLI-Hub as interface infrastructure alongside the CLI surface. The current system includes 61 companion skills for CLIs. These skills summarize command groups, examples, JSON usage, prerequisite software, and agent-specific constraints, giving agents task-time capability descriptions instead of forcing them to infer behavior from help text alone. This discovery layer follows the same pressure identified by tool-use work: agents need a reliable way to select and invoke external capabilities, with prompt-time descriptions serving as one piece of the runtime surface. Tool-use and API-call work motivates accurate tool selection and invocation [ 5, 6]. API-centered systems and benchmarks stress call correctness and coverage [ 7, 8]; the Model Context Protocol (MCP) motivates a protocol boundary for exposing tools and context [ 11 ]. 

CLI-Hub adds the package and registry layer. The local registry contains 65 CLI-Anything CLI entries across 29 categories. The public registry contains 18 third-party entries across 11 categories. The installer dispatches across pip, npm, uv, bundled/system tools, and command-based installers. Listing and search commands support JSON output, and preview commands provide a generic consumer for preview bundles and live sessions. The current CLI-Hub is still partly human-facing. The next agent-first version should expose structured capability search, install plans, status diagnostics, direct skill fetch, preview metadata, and a stable schema that agents can query during work. Protocol work such as MCP points in the same direction for tool/context interoperability; CLI-Hub is the package, skill, and capability layer for CLI harnesses rather than a model-provider protocol [ 11 ]. At that point discovery becomes part of runtime: the agent asks for a capability, receives candidate interfaces, installs or locates one, loads the skill, checks backend availability, and continues the task. 

> 10

CLI-Anything 4 Case Study Discovery to Experimental CLI Matrix 

Agents search by intent today; the matrix is a future-facing way to organize scenarios through runtime layers. 

Discovery families Intent search starts with work shape and artifact type before choosing a concrete executable. 

Creative / Studio 

> drawio blender freecad

Offi ce / Desk 

> libreo ffi ce zotero obsidian

Media / Factory 

> shotcut kdenlive audacity

Debug / Room 

> renderdoc nsight lldb

Automation 

> browser n8n pm2

Public CLIs 

> npm uv bundled
> intent match

Runtime chain The selected route gives every agent the same operating surface.  

> Skills task vocabulary CLIs verbs + fl ags Harnesses stateful adapter Preview rendered artifact Registry + install source + launcher

Scenario cuts same contract di ff erent intents Make video 

> media timeline preview export

Build CAD 

> parametric model mesh output

Debug GPU 

> capture trace inspect frame

Prepare report 

> offi ce document install path

Prototype view Pick a scenario, then route future matrix rows through skills, CLI verbs, harness state, preview artifacts, and the install source. 

Figure 5: Discovery toward an experimental CLI Matrix. Once many interfaces exist, agents will need to choose tools by scenario, capability, and package metadata together. 

## 4 Case Study 

4.1 Growing Blender Into an Agent-Native CLI 

Blender is a useful stress test for CLI-Anything because it spans full scene construction across a large application surface. A useful Blender interface has to represent scene-level settings, mesh primitives, transforms, materials, modifier stacks, cameras, lights, animation, render configuration, backend execution, and visual feedback. The current Blender harness therefore shows how a real, complicated application grows an agent-facing command surface without replacing the real renderer. The current Click tree contains 12 group nodes including the root command group and nested live-preview group. It exposes 54 command functions: 53 public commands and 1 hidden monitor command used by live preview. The surface follows the backend concepts an agent needs to construct and check a scene: scene , object , material , modifier , camera , light , animation , render , preview , and 

session .

11 CLI-Anything 4 Case Study Blender harness: from agent commands to real headless renders 

> Source-derived surface: command tree, JSON project state, bpy generation, backend execution, preview bundles, and tests.

54 

> CLI commands

12 

> Click groups

8

> Primitives

8

> Modifiers

228  

> Tests
> CLI verbs
> scene / object
> render / preview
> Session JSON
> .blend-cli.json
> undo + autosave
> Domain core
> validate params
> mutate state
> bpy script
> rebuild full
> Blender scene
> Backend
> blender --background
> verify outputs
> Preview path project fingerprint -> cached bundle -> hero.png + workbench.png -> manifest.json + summary.json -> CLI-Hub live viewer
> The preview helper may add a temporary camera or sun for visibility, records that as a warning, and keeps renderer truth inside Blender.

Figure 6: Blender case-study pipeline. Commands mutate a JSON scene contract, domain modules validate the state, the bpy generator rebuilds the scene, and the real Blender backend renders or publishes preview artifacts. 

4.1.1 From Blender’s Native Architecture to Harness Growth 

The first design question is where Blender already has a stable, executable boundary. Natively, Blender is a GUI wrapped around a large scene database and execution engine. A .blend file stores data-blocks such as scenes, objects, meshes, materials, cameras, lights, animation curves, render settings, and collections. The 3D viewport, timeline, properties editor, and outliner are human-facing views and editors over that graph. Under those views sits Blender’s Python API, bpy , which exposes the same object graph, operators, RNA properties, and render configuration that the GUI manipulates. Below that are the render engines–Cycles, EEVEE, and Workbench–which turn the scene graph into images, animation frames, and preview artifacts. This architecture gives CLI-Anything a natural injection point. The harness can avoid GUI clicking and renderer implementation because Blender already exposes a backend scripting layer through bpy ,RNA properties, operators, dependency-graph evaluation, and native render engines. The harness layer can therefore sit outside Blender as a stateful command surface, generate a bpy program, and ask the real Blender process to execute it without replaying GUI events. The injected layer is thin in the right place: it translates agent intentions into a stable scene contract and into native Blender Python, while Blender remains responsible for scene construction semantics, version-specific behavior, dependency evaluation, file formats, and final rendering. This is why the case study centers on architecture and backend reuse. CLI-Anything uses Blender’s own backend layers as the source of truth. A precise scene contract, a correct bpy lowering pass, and a backend wrapper are enough to invoke Blender’s scene engine and check the resulting artifact without privileged access to Blender internals. The remaining design problem is the project format. Blender’s native .blend files are binary and excellent for Blender itself. They are a poor primary workspace for an agent that needs diffs, inspection, undo/redo, and JSON responses after every command. The harness therefore keeps an agent-facing 

.blend-cli.json contract as the working state and treats .blend and rendered images as backend artifacts. This creates a four-stage mapping: 

12 CLI-Anything 4 Case Study Blender's native architecture: GUI views over an executable scene engine 

The harness can attach at the bpy/backend boundary because Blender already separates user views, scene data, scripting, and rendering. 

Native Blender Agent backend adapter 

Human-facing editors 

3D Viewport, Timeline, Properties, Outliner, Shader/Compositor views 

.blend scene database 

Scenes, objects, meshes, materials, modifiers, cameras, animation, render settings 

bpy / RNA / operators 

Programmatic access to the same scene graph and operations used by the GUI. 

Dependency graph 

evaluate relationships 

Render engines 

Cycles / EEVEE / Workbench 

Output artifacts 

images, frames, previews 

Harness backend adapter 

Lower JSON scene state 

into bpy operations. 

Run Blender's real 

scene engine headlessly. 

What remains native 

scene evaluation, rendering, 

export, and file formats 

Figure 7: Blender’s original software architecture. The GUI editors are views over a .blend scene database; 

bpy , RNA, and operators expose that same state programmatically; the dependency graph and render engines produce output artifacts. CLI-Anything attaches above the backend scripting and rendering layers, below the GUI event machinery. 

13 CLI-Anything 4 Case Study 

1. CLI commands mutate a JSON scene contract that an agent can inspect. 2. Domain modules validate Blender concepts before they become backend code. 3. The scene-contract lowering pass turns the JSON graph into a complete bpy script. 4. The backend execution wrapper runs the real Blender binary and verifies that the expected artifact exists. The current backend design follows directly from that mapping. The scene model creates a 

.blend-cli.json contract with scene , render , world , objects , materials , cameras , lights ,

collections , and metadata . The session layer wraps that contract in an agent workspace: project path, modified state, undo/redo snapshots, history, and autosave behavior. This lets an agent inspect the graph, recover from mistakes, and continue across command turns without depending on a window being open. The command tree grows by preserving Blender’s semantic structure. Object and material components map primitive creation, transforms, material creation, and assignment into checked JSON operations. The modifier component defines 8 modifier types with typed parameters and ranges, mirroring Blender’s modifier-stack idea in a form an agent can inspect. The lighting, animation, and render components map cameras, lights, frame ranges, keyframes, FPS, interpolation, render engines, presets, resolution, samples, and output formats into validated scene state. The command entry point is therefore a surface over a typed Blender scene model with coherent backend semantics. The render path is where the harness meets the real application. The scene-contract lowering pass translates the JSON scene into a full Blender Python script: clear the default scene, apply unit and frame settings, set render and world state, create materials, instantiate primitives, restore parenting, attach modifiers, create cameras and lights, insert keyframes, and call bpy.ops.render.render . The backend execution wrapper then locates the installed blender binary, runs the generated script through Blender’s headless execution path, checks the return code, verifies that an output artifact was actually produced, resolves Blender’s frame-number suffixes, and returns the method, format, Blender version, and file size. The generated EEVEE script path is version-tolerant: newer Blender builds can select 

BLENDER_EEVEE_NEXT , while Blender 4.0 still selects BLENDER_EEVEE . The principle is the same as the rest of CLI-Anything : the harness should absorb backend variability and expose stable agent-facing verbs. A representative workflow illustrates the contract. The agent creates or opens a scene, issues domain commands that mutate JSON state, asks for structured inspection, then renders or previews through Blender:                

> Blender harness workflow
> cli-anything-blender scene new --profile product_render --output scene.blend-cli.json cli-anything-blender --project scene.blend-cli.json \ object add cube --name Body --location 0,0,0 cli-anything-blender --project scene.blend-cli.json \ material create --name BrushedMetal --metallic 0.8 cli-anything-blender --project scene.blend-cli.json material assign 0 0 cli-anything-blender --project scene.blend-cli.json \ modifier add bevel --object 0 --param width=0.08 --param segments=3 cli-anything-blender --project scene.blend-cli.json camera add --name MainCam --active cli-anything-blender --project scene.blend-cli.json light add sun --name KeySun cli-anything-blender --project scene.blend-cli.json \ preview capture --recipe quick --force
> 14 CLI-Anything 4Case Study
> Native Blender layer CLI-Anything implementation Agent-facing result
> Scene database and binary .blend state Scene model and session manager Create, open, save, inspect, undo, redo, and persist an inspectable
> .blend-cli.json workspace. Objects, meshes, materi-als, modifiers, cameras, and lights Object, material, modifier, and light-ing components Build Blender scene resources with checked parameters, stable IDs, and JSON output after mutations. Timeline, render set-tings, and bpy execu-tion model Animation and render components plus the scene-contract lowering pass Set frame ranges, keyframes, render presets, output formats, and lower the scene contract into executable bpy
> scripts. Background Blender process and render en-gines Backend execution wrapper Run the real Blender binary headlessly and reject missing or empty render outputs. Viewport feedback and render-backed preview artifacts Preview publisher and bundle writer Publish preview bundles, live-session metadata, trajectory history, and viewer commands for CLI-Hub .Validation evidence for the lifted interface Unit tests and backend-gated artifact checks Check the scene contract in isolation, then verify generated scripts, native execution, preview bundles, and ren-dered outputs through Blender.
> Table 4: How the Blender harness turns backend concepts into a comprehensive CLI surface. The command tree grows from stateful, testable backend components and domain concepts.

4.1.2 Preview and Test Evidence 

Preview is implemented as a first-class Blender pathway. The preview publisher currently exposes 1 preview recipe, quick . It fingerprints the project state, prepares or reuses a cacheable bundle, ensures the scene is viewable by adding a preview camera or sun only when needed, renders both an Eevee-style hero image and a Workbench structure image, and writes manifest.json , summary.json , and artifact records. Live preview adds session.json , a current link, trajectory.json , poller metadata, and 

CLI-Hub watch/inspect/html commands. The important design point is that the preview stays cheap and inspectable while still being produced through Blender’s renderer and recorded as a bundle an agent can reason about. The test suite mirrors this layered design. Unit tests cover scene creation, object operations, materials, modifiers, lighting, animation, render settings, session history, and preview bundle bookkeeping using synthetic state. E2E tests cover scene roundtrips, generated bpy script validity, realistic workflows, CLI subprocess behavior, preview capture and live refresh, backend discovery, real headless renders, PNG magic-byte checks for preview artifacts, and direct execution of minimal bpy scripts through Blender. The important evidence is the validation boundary: local scene logic is checked in isolation, and final artifacts are checked through the native backend wherever possible. For a lifted creative tool, a command succeeds only when the produced scene, preview bundle, or render artifact survives the same backend path a user would eventually trust. 

4.2 Slay the Spire II: When the Backend Has to Be Discovered Inside the Running App 

The Blender case works because the application already gives us a mature backend surface. bpy exposes the scene graph, operators, render configuration, and artifact production path. Slay the Spire II is 

> 15

CLI-Anything 4 Case Study Slay the Spire II original runtime: state is owned by live screens and frame systems 

> Before a CLI exists, the agent-relevant facts are spread across game systems, screen controllers, scene nodes, input, and rendering.

Steam game process / Godot scene tree single frame-owned runtime  

> Authoritative run state
> RunState, CombatManager,
> player, energy, draw pile,
> rooms, map and rewards.
> Screen controllers
> Map, rewards, merchant,
> event, combat and card
> selection screens.
> Frame loop and input
> ProcessFrame, input events,
> button clicks, hitboxes
> and modal transitions.
> Scene nodes and overlays
> NOverlayStack, buttons,
> prompts, card widgets,
> and transient UI nodes.
> Implicit action boundary
> Actions are accepted through live screens, selected nodes,
> and frame-owned transition logic.
> screen-owned
> commands
> External observation
> pixels, keyboard,
> mouse, saved files
> CLI contract needed
> state snapshot,
> valid choices,
> stable action verbs,
> error feedback
> semantic boundary
> has to be inserted
> Design implication Place the bridge inside the game process; read screen-owned objects there; schedule actions on the frame-owned path.

Figure 8: Slay the Spire II before the harness. Run state, combat state, room state, overlays, screen nodes, input handlers, and rendering share one live game runtime. The useful control boundary sits inside the process, beside the objects that own the current decision. 

a different kind of case. The useful state lives inside a running game process. The state is temporal, screen dependent, and split across game systems and UI nodes: run state, combat state, current room, map screen, reward overlays, card-selection screens, merchant screens, menu buttons, and transient hand-selection prompts. A CLI for this software starts with runtime archaeology: finding where decisions enter the game, which objects carry authoritative state, and which operations can be made stable enough for an external agent. The published slay_the_spire_ii harness takes that path. Its Python side exposes 28 Click commands, while the in-game bridge normalizes the game into 15 decision states and 24 single-player action verbs. The bridge is not only an input shim; it creates the backend boundary that the original game does not expose. This is the important engineering contrast with Blender. In Blender, the harness finds a backend boundary that already exists. In Slay the Spire II, the harness first creates a small backend boundary from inside the application. This also exposes a training problem that is easy to miss when a game is treated only as a black-box GUI. Keyboard-and-mouse control is a low-level motor interface, not a semantic action interface. The same intent, such as playing one card on one monster, can be realized through many different traces: different cursor paths, hover states, click timings, drag gestures, screen coordinates, animation delays, and UI resolutions. Those traces may all produce the same game transition, but they look different to a learner. A policy trained on them has to spend capacity modeling accidental input variation instead of the game decision itself. A CLI action collapses that equivalence class into one stable command with explicit arguments. play-card means playing a card; the bridge, not the model, owns the unstable details of how that action is delivered to the runtime. 

16 CLI-Anything 4 Case Study Slay the Spire II harness: discovering an interface inside a live game 

An in-process bridge turns frame-owned game objects into a small, typed HTTP contract for agents. 

28 

CLI commands 

15 

Decision states 

24 

Bridge verbs 

HTTP + JSON 

Contract shape 

14 

Tests 

Inside Steam game process / Godot frame loop Outside game process 

local HTTP boundary 

Live game runtime 

Run state, combat, 

rooms, overlays, 

map, rewards, 

menus, UI nodes. 

STS2_Bridge mod 

Runs in-process. 

Reads live objects. 

Schedules actions 

on ProcessFrame. 

Python CLI adapter 

HTTP client, 

state normalizer, 

typed payloads, 

Click + REPL. 

read state 

apply action 

JSON state 

action payload 

State readers 

Current room, 

hand, map, 

shop, events. 

Frame queue 

Move bridge work 

onto the game 

main thread. 

Action executor 

Call game/UI 

verbs after state 

validation. 

Agent contract 

Decision states 

and stable verbs: 

play-card, proceed. 

Bridge boundary: 15 decision states and 24 action verbs. 

The hard work is the runtime boundary and decision protocol; the Python CLI can remain compact and typed. 

Figure 9: Slay the Spire II in-process bridge. The CLI speaks HTTP from outside the game, while 

STS2_Bridge runs inside the Godot/MegaCrit runtime, schedules work on the main thread, reads live screens and run state, and exposes stable decision/action contracts. 

17 CLI-Anything 4 Case Study 

4.2.1 The Bridge Has to Live Where the State Lives 

Process placement follows a simple rule: put the harness boundary next to the objects whose names matter. From outside the process, a turn in a deckbuilder is mostly a rendered screen. From inside the process, the same turn is a structured state: player energy, hand cards, draw pile, monster intents, current room, reward list, map choices, event options, shop inventory, and the overlay currently blocking progress. The bridge lives inside the game because those names already exist there. This changes the meaning of “CLI wrapping.” The wrapper is a two-part system. The C# bridge is the privileged reader and actor inside the runtime. The Python CLI is the small external language that agents call. Keeping those roles separate gives the harness a clean failure boundary: the mod owns Godot and MegaCrit objects; the CLI owns parsing, JSON output, timeouts, REPL behavior, and agent-facing command names. The bridge therefore starts by attaching to the Godot main loop and opening a loopback HTTP listener: 

> STS2 bridge initialization
> var tree = (SceneTree)Engine.GetMainLoop(); tree.Connect(SceneTree.SignalName.ProcessFrame, Callable.From(ProcessMainThreadQueue)); _listener = new HttpListener(); _listener.Prefixes.Add("http://localhost:15526/"); _listener.Prefixes.Add("http://127.0.0.1:15526/"); _listener.Start(); _serverThread = new Thread(ServerLoop) {IsBackground = true, Name = "STS2_Bridge_Server" }; _serverThread.Start();

The local HTTP boundary is deliberately ordinary. Python can call it through a small client. A human can inspect it with curl . The bridge can return plain JSON or markdown without teaching the game about terminals, Click, or agent sessions. The endpoint surface stays tiny: GET reads the current state, and POST sends one action payload. The hard engineering remains inside the mod, where the runtime objects are available. The second boundary is thread ownership. Godot scene-tree objects, UI nodes, and many game objects are frame-owned. The HTTP server runs on background threads. The bridge has to cross from transport code into frame-owned state with a clear handoff. BridgeMod.cs uses a ConcurrentQueue<Action> 

and drains a bounded number of work items on ProcessFrame :  

> STS2 frame-owned work queue
> private static readonly ConcurrentQueue<Action> _mainThreadQueue = new(); private static void ProcessMainThreadQueue() {int processed = 0; while (_mainThreadQueue.TryDequeue(out var action) && processed < 10) {
> 18 CLI-Anything 4Case Study
> try { action(); } catch (Exception ex) { GD.PrintErr($"[STS2 Bridge] {ex}"); } processed++; }}internal static Task<T> RunOnMainThread<T>(Func<T> func) {var tcs = new TaskCompletionSource<T>(); _mainThreadQueue.Enqueue(() => {try { tcs.SetResult(func()); } catch (Exception ex) { tcs.SetException(ex); } }); return tcs.Task; }

That queue is the core systems decision. It lets HTTP requests wait for a frame-safe answer, limits per-frame bridge work, and keeps exceptions attached to the request that caused them. State reads and actions then become explicit runtime transactions: 

> STS2 request-to-runtime transaction
> var stateTask = RunOnMainThread(() => BuildGameState()); var state = stateTask.GetAwaiter().GetResult(); var resultTask = RunOnMainThread(() => ExecuteAction(action, parsed)); var result = resultTask.GetAwaiter().GetResult();

The third boundary is semantic. The bridge should reveal decisions, choices, and legal verbs, while the game remains the authority for simulation. The external Python process keeps a shallow model: it asks for state, normalizes that state, and sends typed actions. The game decides which cards exist, which targets are legal, which modal screen is active, which reward can be claimed, and which room transition happens next. This is the philosophy behind the in-process bridge. Move close enough to the runtime to read meaningful objects. Respect the engine’s scheduling model. Export the smallest stable vocabulary that supports planning. Leave combat resolution, map progression, rewards, save state, and UI transitions to the original software. The result is a hack in the productive systems sense: a new interface boundary inserted at the point where the application already knows what the user is deciding. 

4.2.2 Screens Become Decision States 

The hard part is the semantic lift. The game presents a run plus the currently active room and whichever screen or overlay happens to be on top. BuildGameState therefore reads both backend game objects and frontend screen nodes. It checks RunManager , CombatManager , NOverlayStack ,

NMapScreen , NRewardsScreen , NCardGridSelectionScreen , NMerchantRoom , and room classes such as CombatRoom , EventRoom , RestSiteRoom , and TreasureRoom . That is exactly the architecture we wanted to surface: the original application state spans backend systems and human-facing UI layers. The bridge turns that spread-out state into an agent grammar. Combat rooms become combat_play .  

> 19 CLI-Anything 4Case Study

Card reward overlays become card_reward . Post-combat rewards become combat_rewards . Map screens become map_select . Events, shops, rest sites, relic choices, treasure rooms, game-over screens, and fallback overlays each get a named state. The Python state adapter then normalizes those raw bridge states into compact JSON records with the fields an agent needs for the next move: cards, targets, energy, choices, prices, relics, map nodes, prompts, and proceed flags. The resulting design has a useful asymmetry. The bridge is allowed to know about messy runtime details. The CLI surface should stay boring. An agent should see state , play-card , use-potion ,

end-turn , choose-map , claim-reward , pick-card-reward , event , rest , shop-buy , select-card ,

confirm-selection , and proceed . Those verbs are less expressive than the full internal runtime, by design. They are stable enough to plan with. The value of that stability is especially important for data collection. In a source-free black-box setting, collecting keyboard-and-mouse demonstrations is labor intensive because the data unit is an entire human trajectory. The collector must produce many examples, across resolutions, timings, rooms, overlays, and partial failures, even when the underlying decision is the same. With an adapter plus a CLI, the data unit changes. Once a command has been validated, its intended effect is stable: choose-map 

chooses a map node, claim-reward claims a reward, and proceed advances when the game permits progress. New trajectories can then be generated by automated exploration over command sequences and state predicates, rather than by repeatedly recording human motor behavior. The bridge turns data collection from imitation of pixels and input traces into composition over confirmed semantic operators. 

4.2.3 Actions Cross the Frontend/Backend Boundary 

Action execution shows why this is a harder example than a file-backed creative tool. Some actions can use game-domain methods directly. Others have to operate through screen nodes and UI controls because the game has encoded part of the operation in the interface layer. The bridge code finds menu and screen nodes, reads private fields with reflection when needed, and calls ForceClick on internal buttons and hitboxes. Starting a run, abandoning a run, choosing map nodes, confirming card selections, claiming rewards, leaving rooms, and handling treasure all pass through this mixed frontend/backend surface. This is a useful lesson for agent-native interfaces. A mature software backend makes the lift easier. Many real applications expose only partial backend structure. Games are a clear example because the authoritative state is live and the action system is tied to screens, animations, modal overlays, and frame scheduling. The right harness boundary may be a small in-process bridge that reads internal objects, respects the runtime thread model, and exports a narrow set of stable verbs. The broader lesson is that CLI-Anything has at least two growth modes. In the Blender mode, the harness lifts a mature backend API into a stateful CLI. In the Slay the Spire II mode, the harness establishes a backend adapter inside the application first, then lifts that adapter into a CLI. Both routes preserve the same agent-facing contract: explicit state, typed actions, backend truth, and testable behavior. The difference is where the interface boundary has to be found. This case also reframes games as an interface benchmark. Playing a game is normally an entertainment activity, designed around human perception, attention, and motor control. Yet the same activity can be automated once the software exposes explicit state and typed actions. That suggests a broader design rule for future applications, not only for games: the GUI should remain the human-facing surface, optimized for inspection, exploration, and enjoyment, while a CLI or equivalent machine-facing interface should expose the same task in a compact, testable, and compositional form for agents. The two surfaces do not compete. They serve different users of the same software: humans need an interface they can see and manipulate; agents need an interface they can parse, plan over, and call reliably.            

> 20 CLI-Anything 5Evaluation
> Runtime problem Bridge-side work Agent-facing result
> State spread across run ob-jects, rooms, overlays, and UI screens Read game systems and screen nodes inside BuildGameState .Expose 15 normalized decision states through state .Game objects owned by the frame thread Route HTTP work through
> RunOnMainThread and
> ProcessFrame .Make state reads and actions callable from a normal local CLI without racing the runtime. Actions encoded in both game commands and UI nodes Use internal methods, screen traver-sal, reflection, and ForceClick
> where the game requires it. Expose stable verbs such as
> play-card ,choose-map ,rest , and
> proceed .Human screens too detailed for planning Collapse screen-specific details into task-level choices, prompts, cards, enemies, rewards, and flags. Give agents a compact JSON state that supports long-horizon play and recovery. Regression risk from a live, versioned game runtime Keep 9 unit tests and 5 E2E tests around adapter behavior and bridge workflows. Track the contract through tests and documented adapter behavior.
> Table 5: How the Slay the Spire II harness builds an agent-native boundary inside a live game whose useful state spans backend objects and frontend screens.

## 5 Evaluation 

We evaluate CLI-Anything as an interface system. The relevant questions are about surface area, production usage, and ecosystem maturity: how many interfaces exist, how broad the catalog is, how CLI-Hub is actually used, and whether repository structure supports agent discovery. This emphasis follows agent-environment evaluations that score task completion through executable software states. Coding tasks use tests and repositories [ 12 , 13 ]; web and enterprise tasks use browser or service state [ 14 , 16 , 17 ]; app-world and tool-user tasks check database or policy state [ 9, 10 ]; and mobile or desktop tasks inspect device and OS state [19, 18]. 

5.1 Manipulation Artifacts From Recorded Runs 

Counts are only part of the evaluation story for an interface layer. A harness also has to survive the moment where an agent changes software state and the system produces an inspectable visual artifact. Figure 10 shows midpoint frames extracted from three recorded manipulation demos: Slay the Spire II gameplay control, Blender orbital relay drone preview, and FreeCAD Curiosity rover preview. These are not mock screenshots. They are static slices of runs where a command surface, state/trajectory display, and rendered or live application state move together. The three examples stress different parts of the same contract. Slay the Spire II validates an in-process bridge for a running game whose useful state is split across game objects and screen state. Blender validates a backend-rendered creative workflow, where each preview is tied to a generated scene contract and real renderer output. FreeCAD validates a CAD trajectory where command progress, preview bundles, and intermediate geometry remain synchronized. The evaluation point is that agent-native interfaces need visible evidence, but that evidence should be attributable to command/state transitions rather than detached from the underlying backend.   

> 21 CLI-Anything 5Evaluation

Registry surface Entries Categories Source 

Generated/curated harness CLIs 65 29 registry.json 

Public third-party CLIs 18 11 public_registry.json 

Combined catalog 83 32 both registries 

Table 6: Current CLI catalog size and category coverage. 

> Slay the Spire II
> A live game state paired with a control-room surface, current decision label, command log, and agent-readable run summary.
> Blender
> A mid-build orbital relay drone pre-view, with command progress and real Blender-rendered artifacts in the same trajectory.
> FreeCAD
> An intermediate rover assembly where the command stream, bundle stream, and CAD preview stay aligned.

Figure 10: Midpoint frames from real manipulation demos. Each frame is extracted from a recorded run and shows a live or previewed task state tied to command history, rather than a standalone visual mockup. 

5.2 Catalog Coverage 

The current catalog has moved beyond a small demonstration set. The generated and curated harness registry contains 65 entries, while the public registry adds 18 third-party CLIs with heterogeneous install strategies. Together they cover 83 CLI entries across 32 combined categories. This matters because the argument for agent-native interfaces depends on breadth: a single harness can show that a GUI application can be lifted; a catalog shows that the method generalizes across creative tools, office artifacts, AI services, browser automation, debugging, graphics, video, scientific tools, DevOps, and knowledge workflows. The breadth goal is analogous to web and desktop-agent benchmarks that evaluate agents across many sites, applications, and task families. Early web benchmarks studied open-domain and shopping interactions [ 21 , 28 ]; later web benchmarks added realistic sites and enterprise workflows [ 14 , 16 , 17 ]. Visual and mobile benchmarks add tasks where screenshots and gestures are central [15, 19, 22]; desktop benchmarks add operating-system state [18]. 

5.3 CLI-Hub Usage 

CLI-Hub usage is already agent-heavy. Observed CLI-Hub telemetry shows an 87.8% agent share and a 7.19 × agent/human call ratio, and the CLI usage trend is rising rapidly. The important signal is not a single absolute counter. It is that agents already call CLI-Hub as an operational dependency, while humans still browse, install, and inspect tools through the same distribution layer. This mixed pattern changes the design target: structured search, install diagnostics, direct skill fetch, and preview metadata should be treated as runtime affordances for agents, not just documentation conveniences for people. 

> 22

CLI-Anything 5 Evaluation 

Top combined categories Harness CLIs Public CLIs Total 

ai 6 3 9devops 4 3 7web 4 3 7graphics 5 0 5video 5 0 5communication 2 2 4office 4 0 4gamedev 3 0 3image 3 0 3knowledge 2 1 33d 2 0 2audio 1 1 2

Table 7: Top catalog categories by combined CLI count. CLI-Hub production usage: agents already dominate the call mix 

> The signal to watch is not one counter; it is the combination of agent-heavy calls, a rising total, and human usage that remains present.
> Total calls

129,916 current production view 

> Agent share

87.8% 114,057 agent calls 

> Agent / human

7.19x 15,859 human calls 

> Growth

+694.1% observed usage window 

> Interpretation: CLI-Hub is already used as agent runtime infrastructure, while human calls still make the same catalog inspectable and installable.

All CLI-Hub 

0

20000 

40000 

60000 

80000 

100000 

120000 

140000 

> calls
> human
> 12.2%
> agent
> 87.8%
> 129,916

Current call mix 

> Human
> Agent

Earlier Current 

0

20000 

40000 

60000 

80000 

100000 

120000 

140000 

> calls
> +694.1%
> 16,361
> 129,916

Observed call growth 

0 25 50 75 100  

> Agent Human

## 7.19x 

> agent calls per
> human call

Ratio signal 

Figure 12: CLI-Hub usage mix and trend. Agent calls dominate the current call mix, the total call volume has grown substantially over the observed usage window, and the agent/human call ratio shows that CLI-Hub is already used as runtime infrastructure rather than only as a human package browser. 

5.4 Additional Repository Signals 

Other support signals show the same pattern. The repository pairs CLIs with 61 companion skills, making the interfaces directly discoverable by skill-aware agents. Preview-bundle integrations show that the display protocol is being adopted beyond a single case study. The public registry also exercises multiple install strategies: npm, pip, bundled/system CLIs, uv, brew, and script installers. This diversity is important because a serious agent interface layer cannot assume one package manager or 

23 CLI-Anything 5 Evaluation 0 2 4 6 8

> CLI count
> debugging
> automation
> audio
> 3d
> knowledge
> image
> gamedev
> office
> communication
> video
> graphics
> web
> devops
> ai
> 2
> 2
> 2
> 2
> 3
> 3
> 3
> 4
> 4
> 5
> 5
> 7
> 7
> 9

Top CLI-Anything and public CLI categories 

Figure 11: Top combined categories across the harness and public CLI registries. The current catalog spans AI, web, DevOps, video, graphics, office, image, and communication tools. 

one software backend. 

Additional agent-support signal Count 

Companion skills for CLIs 61 Preview bundle helper integrations 5Public registry install strategy: npm 8Public registry install strategy: pip 3Public registry install strategy: brew 2Public registry install strategy: bundled 2Public registry install strategy: command 1Public registry install strategy: script 1Public registry install strategy: uv 1

Table 8: Companion skills, preview integrations, and install-strategy diversity for the current CLI catalog. 

24 CLI-Anything 7 Limitations and Future Work 

## 6 Cross-Harness Lessons and Failure Modes 

The most useful lessons came from real software categories across many canonical apps. Creative tools such as GIMP, Blender, Inkscape, Krita, and FreeCAD show why real renderers matter. Effects, cameras, lights, fonts, image filters, and geometry kernels often behave differently from simplified reimplementations. Office tools such as LibreOffice and Zotero show the value of structured package formats and headless export. Video tools such as Shotcut, Kdenlive, Openscreen, and VideoCaptioner expose timecode, duration, codec, and filter-mapping issues that only appear under real media validation. Debugging and graphics tools such as LLDB, RenderDoc, Nsight Graphics, and Unreal Insights show that inspection-heavy software can be especially agent-native once state is surfaced as JSON and diffable artifacts. Several failure modes recur across harnesses. First, a backend process may exit successfully while producing no useful output. The fix is artifact validation over exit-code trust. Second, a project-only mutation can fail to survive export because the render path lacks a mapping for a filter or effect. The fix is to document project-only features or add real render mappings. Third, stateless commands lose context across turns. The fix is explicit session state, auto-save, and status probes. Fourth, preview screenshots can become decorative while losing truthfulness. The fix is a bundle protocol tied to real project state and backend-generated artifacts. Fifth, installability is part of usability. The fix is a registry, install strategies, skills, and clear backend error messages. These failures are mundane systems failures with higher stakes for agents than for humans. A human can notice that an exported file is blank. An agent may only see a path and a zero exit code unless the harness checks. A human can remember which project window is active. An agent needs that fact in a session file. A human can visually compare two previews. An agent needs the preview bundle, summary, metrics, and trajectory reference. 

## 7 Limitations and Future Work 

CLI-Anything has a bounded scope. Some software exposes only a compiled binary, opaque state, or interaction patterns that are difficult to lift without accessibility APIs or GUI automation. Some creative decisions still require rich visual judgment. Some preview integrations are early and still have incomplete coverage for meaningful visual state. Work on web, smartphone, and desktop agents remains directly relevant for these cases because some tasks still require operating through visual or browser-native interfaces. Web-agent work covers browser-native interaction when the browser is the real environment [ 21 , 28 ]. Later web benchmarks make those tasks more realistic and workflow-oriented [ 14 , 16 , 17 ]. Visual and mobile-agent benchmarks cover cases where screen state and gestures remain central [ 15 , 19 , 20 ]; AppAgent studies smartphone-app operation through multimodal control [ 22 ]. OSWorld covers the desktop version of the same limitation [ 18 ]. Older GUI automation work remains relevant when screenshots are the only reliable interface description [24, 25]. The next research step is benchmarkable artifact construction. If a harness can construct, inspect, render, and verify artifacts, then task suites can ask agents to produce a diagram, report, CAD model, video edit, GPU-capture analysis, or office document and then evaluate the result programmatically. This would turn many GUI computer-use tasks back into executable environment tasks, aligning with related work on executable coding and synthesized tool-use environments [1, 2]. App-world, tool-user, and mobile benchmarks provide nearby evaluation models for stateful software tasks [9, 10, 19].  

> 25 CLI-Anything References

## 8 Conclusion 

CLI-Anything argues that the future of agents using software depends on richer software affordances for agents, including better screen control where visual operation remains necessary. Real applications already contain backends, project formats, renderers, command systems, APIs, and inspectable state. The practical work is to expose those layers as executable, inspectable, replayable contracts while preserving the real software underneath. Coding agents work partly because their environments execute: commands run, tests fail, files diff, and success can be checked. Professional software needs the same class of interface layer. If an artifact can be checked by code, it can often be built through code. The GUI should remain available to humans and as a fallback. For many agent tasks, the default boundary should be a stateful contract above the application: create with commands, inspect with JSON, render with the real backend, preview with a truthful bundle, discover through skills and CLI-Hub , and verify the artifact that the user will actually open. 

## References 

[1] Ruisheng Cao et al. Qwen3-Coder-Next Technical Report . arXiv:2603.00729, 2026. https: //arxiv.org/abs/2603.00729. [2] DeepSeek-AI. DeepSeek-V3.2: Pushing the Frontier of Open Large Language Models .arXiv:2512.02556, 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.02556. [3] Kimi Team. Kimi K2.5: Visual Agentic Intelligence . arXiv:2602.02276, 2026. https://arxiv.org/ab s/2602.02276. [4] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models . International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. https://openreview.net/forum?id=WE_vluYUL-X. [5] Timo Schick et al. Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, 2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04761. [6] Yujia Qin et al. ToolLLM: Facilitating Large Language Models to Master 16000+ Real-world APIs .International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. https://openreview.net/forum?id= dHng2O0Jjr. [7] Shishir G. Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large Language Model Connected with Massive APIs . arXiv:2305.15334, 2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.15334. [8] Minghao Li et al. API-Bank: A Comprehensive Benchmark for Tool-Augmented LLMs . Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.08244. [9] Harsh Trivedi et al. AppWorld: A Controllable World of Apps and People for Benchmarking Interactive Coding Agents . Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.18901. [10] Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik R. Narasimhan. τ -bench: A Benchmark for Tool-Agent-User Interaction in Real-World Domains . International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. https://openreview.net/forum?id=roNSXZpUDN.  

> 26 CLI-Anything References

[11] Model Context Protocol. Model Context Protocol Specification . 2024. https://modelcontextprotoc ol.io/specification/2024-11-05/index. [12] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-World GitHub Issues? International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. https://proceedings.iclr.cc/paper_files/paper/202 4/hash/edac78c3e300629acfe6cbe9ca88fb84-Abstract-Conference.html. [13] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering .arXiv:2405.15793, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15793. [14] Shuyan Zhou et al. WebArena: A Realistic Web Environment for Building Autonomous Agents .International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. https://proceedings.iclr.cc/paper_fil es/paper/2024/hash/4410c0711e9154a7a2d26f9b3816d1ef-Abstract-Conference.html. [15] Jing Yu Koh et al. VisualWebArena: Evaluating Multimodal Agents on Realistic Visual Web Tasks .Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/24 01.13649. [16] Xiang Deng et al. Mind2Web: Towards a Generalist Agent for the Web . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, 2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.06070. [17] Alexandre Drouin et al. WorkArena: How Capable Are Web Agents at Solving Common Knowledge Work Tasks? International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.077 18. [18] Tianbao Xie et al. OSWorld: Benchmarking Multimodal Agents for Open-Ended Tasks in Real Computer Environments . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37, Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2024. https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/5d413e48f84dc61 244b6be550f1cd8f5-Abstract-Datasets_and_Benchmarks_Track.html. [19] Christopher Rawles et al. AndroidWorld: A Dynamic Benchmarking Environment for Autonomous Agents . arXiv:2405.14573, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.14573. [20] Christopher Rawles, Alice Li, Daniel Rodriguez, Oriana Riva, and Timothy Lillicrap. Android in the Wild: A Large-Scale Dataset for Android Device Control . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.10088. [21] Tianlin Shi, Andrej Karpathy, Linxi Fan, Jonathan Hernandez, and Percy Liang. World of Bits: An Open-Domain Platform for Web-Based Agents . Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR 70:3135–3144, 2017. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v70/shi17a.html. [22] Chi Zhang, Zhao Yang, Jiaxuan Liu, Yucheng Han, Xin Chen, Zebiao Huang, Bin Fu, and Gang Yu. AppAgent: Multimodal Agents as Smartphone Users . arXiv:2312.13771, 2023. https: //arxiv.org/abs/2312.13771. [23] Ben Shneiderman. Direct Manipulation: A Step Beyond Programming Languages . Computer 16(8):57–69, 1983. https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.1983.1654471. [24] Tom Yeh, Tsung-Hsiang Chang, and Robert C. Miller. Sikuli: Using GUI Screenshots for Search and Automation . ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, 2009. https: //doi.org/10.1145/1622176.1622213.  

> 27 CLI-Anything References

[25] Morgan Dixon and James Fogarty. Prefab: Implementing Advanced Behaviors Using Pixel-Based Reverse Engineering of Interface Structure . ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2010. https://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753554. [26] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language Agents with Verbal Reinforcement Learning . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, 2023. https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366. [27] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An Open-Ended Embodied Agent with Large Language Models .Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. https://openreview.net/forum?id=ehfRiF0R3a. [28] Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. WebShop: Towards Scalable Real-World Web Interaction with Grounded Language Agents . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35, 2022. https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/82ad13ec01f9f e44c01cb91814fd7b8c-Abstract-Conference.html.