Title: Langshaw: Declarative Interaction Protocols Based on Sayso and Conflict

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.29601v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 01:28:06 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Langshaw: Declarative Interaction Protocols Based on Sayso and Conflict 

# Munindar P. Singh 1 , Samuel H. Christie V 1 and Amit K. Chopra 21Department of Computer Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA 

> 2

# School of Computing and Communications, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4WA, UK mpsingh@ncsu.edu, shcv@sdf.org, amit.chopra@lancaster.ac.uk 

# Abstract 

Current languages for specifying multiagent proto-cols either over-constrain protocol enactments or complicate capturing their meanings. We propose Langshaw, a declarative protocol language based on (1) sayso , a new construct that captures who has priority over setting each attribute, and (2) nono 

and nogo , two constructs to capture conflicts be-tween actions. Langshaw combines flexibility with an information model to express meaning. We give a formal semantics for Langshaw, procedures for determining the safety and liveness of a protocol, and a method to generate a message-oriented pro-tocol (embedding needed coordination) suitable for flexible asynchronous enactment. 

# 1 Introduction 

Our setting of interest is a decentralized multiagent system (MAS) [Boissier et al. , 2023] in which agents, each reflect-ing its stakeholder’s autonomy, interact in a loosely coupled manner. To achieve interoperation between agents indepen-dently of their construction or reasoning presupposes that we specify their interactions at a high level [Poslad, 2007]. Classically, agents interact by sending messages , each a bundle of information, to one another. Achieving interoper-ation requires (see Section 2) specifying (1) the information each message conveys, (2) constraints on message ordering and occurrence, and (3) the meaning of each message in men-tal [Sadek et al. , 1997] or social [Singh, 2000] constructs. However, modeling interaction via messages is problem-atic. First, a message is a low-level construct—the smallest operational unit of interaction. Models based on messages must contend with an explosion in possible messages and or-ders, and the complexity of coordination. Second, there is not always a natural mapping between messages and meanings. In contrast to existing MAS approaches, we model commu-nicative actions directly inspired by Austin’s (1962) speech act theory, separately both from messages and meanings. 

Approach. We propose Langshaw (after Austin’s middle name), a declarative language for specifying protocols in terms of communicative actions. Langshaw enables the pre-cise and succinct specification of protocols via novel prim-itives for expressing the information content and the social arrangements needed for coordination. Respecting the funda-mental Austinian doctrine of saying makes it so , Langshaw introduces sayso to capture who can declare what informa-tion (i.e., “make it so”). To support flexible interactions, the saysos of agents over the same information are prioritized. Langshaw also introduces primitives to directly capture con-flict between actions. Moreover, to support flexible interac-tions, Langshaw supports agents concurrently attempting ac-tions. The semantics ensures the consistency of the system state without unduly compromising flexibility. 

Contributions. One, we introduce the Langshaw language and give its semantics and efficient decision procedures for checking the safety and liveness of Langshaw specifications. Two, we bridge the gap between synchronous and asyn-chronous communication. Assuming synchronous actions simplifies specification and reasoning. We give Langshaw a synchronous semantics. However, synchrony is an unrealistic model for MAS intended to be deployed over asynchronous infrastructures such as the Internet. We show how to compile a Langshaw protocol into a protocol that can be enacted via asynchronous messaging. Our compilation highlights Lang-shaw’s simplicity and high-level nature: A compiled proto-col may involve subtle coordination that would be difficult to write by hand. We prove the correctness of the compiler. 

# 2 Related Work and Novelty 

Protocols are crucial to MAS engineering methodologies [Cernuzzi and Zambonelli, 2004; Desai et al. , 2005; Rooney 

et al. , 2004; Padgham and Winikoff, 2005], but are tradition-ally expressed in semiformal notations such as AUML. Thus, they fall short of the goals for engineering MAS [Winikoff, 2007]. Through its precision and flexibility, Langshaw offers an opportunity to rethink MAS methodologies by capturing stakeholder intuitions and helping realize implemented MAS. Ferrando et al. [2019] specify protocols as trace ex-pressions over messages. They study diverse communica-tion models, ranging from fully synchronous to fully asyn-chronous, but do not give a method to translate from one model to another, as we do. Moreover, as is common, Fer-rando et al. express the information content implicitly and coordination explicitly, which limits flexibility. Ferrando et al. [2017] devise techniques for the runtime verification of protocols; here, we focus on static verification. 

> arXiv:2606.29601v1 [cs.PL] 28 Jun 2026

BSPL (Blindingly Simple Protocol Language) [Singh, 2011a; Singh, 2011b; Singh, 2012] and HAPN (Hierarchical Agent Protocol Notation) [Winikoff et al. , 2018] mix infor-mation content with coordination, gaining flexibility and con-currency at the cost of unwieldiness. HAPN’s state-machine model is compatible with our synchronous semantics. BSPL supports flexible asynchronous enactments, and we show how to compile Langshaw into BSPL to benefit from asynchrony. Baldoni et al. ’s (2014) 2CL specifies social meaning via commitments and temporal and relational constraints. 2CL does not model information or support asynchrony. Langshaw supports encoding social meaning and thus helps support ac-countability [Baldoni et al. , 2023]. Its model enhances those of Custard [Chopra and Singh, 2016] and Clouseau [Singh and Chopra, 2020] via primitives to capture coordination. CArtAgO [Ricci et al. , 2009] undergirds multiagent pro-gramming frameworks such as JaCaMo [Boissier et al. ,2013]. CArtAgO agents coordinate via tuple spaces [Carriero and Gelernter, 1989]. MAS programming models such as Ja-CaMo, Jason [Vieira et al. , 2007], and Jade [Bellifemine et al. , 2007; Bergenti et al. , 2020] lack support for protocols. Ricci et al. [2019] argue for decentralization and scalabil-ity by combining MAS with the Web, but their interaction model is limited to HTTP (as on the Web). Langshaw give an abstract model for richer interactions, supporting asynchrony while based on a conceptually central social state (Section 3). Traditional approaches rely on a “synchronizer” in the in-frastructure to decide which actions occurred in what order. For example, in Weyns and Holvoet’s (2004) model, when agents perform conflicting actions simultaneously, the envi-ronment picks the successful ones. Such a synchronizer is not a social entity. It may avoid an integrity violation by forcing an ordering, but only arbitrarily. In Langshaw, such decisions are handled socially—a good protocol would have the right saysos to avoid the mishaps of concurrency. 

# 3 Langshaw Syntax and Informal Semantics 

We first conceive a Langshaw-based multiagent system as op-erating one social artifact, the locus of its social state. Syn-chronous (and concurrent) social actions by (agents playing) roles in the system update this artifact. These updates respect local consistency (only different roles make take conflicting actions) and causality (an action may occur in a state only if the the information it relies on is present there). The social state is nothing but the set of such (performed) actions. The purpose of a Langshaw protocol is to specify such a system. Enacting the protocol means updating the social state. Listing 1 illustrates Langshaw’s syntax (Table 1); we use it to explain how a protocol is enacted. As shown, the Purchase 

protocol specifies roles SELLER , BUYER , and SHIPPER .Lines 4:–10: specify social actions, each to be performed by a role; each action specifies one or more attributes (to capture its meaning), including one or more key attributes to uniquify instances. For example, BUYER may attempt the action RFQ by providing bindings (values) for ID and item 

and SELLER may attempt Quote by providing bindings for 

> ID

, item , and price . Each Action is reified in an implicit ac-tion attribute, which is bound if and only if that action has                                                          

> Protocol −→ Name Roles Attrs Dos Saysos ⌊Nogos ⌋ ⌊ Nonos ⌋
> Roles −→ who R+
> Attrs −→ what Info Info −→ [Akey ]+[Expr ]∗
> Expr −→ A|Expr and Expr |Expr or Expr Dos −→ do Action +
> Action −→ R: [ B(Info )] +
> Saysos −→ sayso [Ranking :A]+
> Ranking −→ R|R>Ranking Nogos −→ nogo [Action ̸→Action ]+
> Nonos −→ nono [Action Action ]+
> Table 1: Langshaw syntax. −→ ,|,∗,+indicate production, choice, zero or more repetitions, and one or more repetitions, respectively.
> [ ] and ⌊ ⌋ indicate grouping and optionality, respectively. A,B, and
> Rare, respectively, sets of (terminal) attributes, actions, and roles.

Listing 1 Purchase in Langshaw.  

> 1:

P u r c h a s e / / Name o f t h e p r o t o c o l  

> 2:

who Buyer , S e l l e r , S h i p p e r / / r o l e s  

> 3:

what ID key , R e j e c t o r D e l i v e r / / C o m p l e t i o n  

> 4:

do / / How t o c h a n g e t h e s o c i a l s t a t e  

> 5:

Buyer : RFQ( ID , i t e m )  

> 6:

S e l l e r : Quote ( ID , i t e m , p r i c e )  

> 7:

Buyer : A c c e p t ( ID , i t e m , p r i c e , a d d r e s s )  

> 8:

Buyer : R e j e c t ( ID , Quote )  

> 9:

S e l l e r : I n s t r u c t ( ID , Accept , i t e m , a d d r e s s , f e e )  

> 10:

S h i p p e r : D e l i v e r ( ID , I n s t r u c t , i t e m , a d d r e s s )  

> 11:

sayso / / S o c i a l a u t h o r i t y o v e r what  

> 12:

Buyer > S e l l e r : i t e m  

> 13:

S e l l e r > Buyer : p r i c e  

> 14:

Buyer : a d d r e s s  

> 15:

S e l l e r : f e e  

> 16:

nono / / What p a i r s a r e i n c o m p a t i b l e  

> 17:

A c c e p t R e j e c t  

> 18:

R e j e c t D e l i v e r  

> 19:

nogo / / What a c t i o n s p r e v e n t a n o t h e r  

> 20:

R e j e c t −/ > I n s t r u c t been instantiated for the specified key bindings. When an ac-tion includes such an attribute, it indicates a reliance on the first action. For example, Reject applies to an instance of 

Quote . Accept could include Quote but item and price make its meaning clearer. Attributes are defined only in reference to their keys: it makes no sense to talk of an item without its ID . Therefore, we assume that if an attribute occurs in two actions, their keys overlap and their intersection uniquely determines that attribute. For a key attribute, a role may either generate a fresh binding or reuse a previous binding from the social state. For any other attribute, if it is bound in the social state relative to a key binding, a role must use the same binding relative to that key. For example, in a social state with RFQ with some  

> ID

and item , a Quote or an Accept with the same ID must contain the same item . If no such binding exists, the role may generate a fresh binding for that attribute only if it has sayso 

over that attribute, as Line 11: and those following illustrate. For example, BUYER and SELLER can both generate item .Attempts may be concurrent. When an agent attempts mul-tiple actions, their bindings must be consistent with each other and the social state. For example, BUYER may concur-rently attempt several RFQ s, each with a distinct binding for 

> ID

. When multiple agents attempt actions concurrently, the agents need not be consistent with each other, just within each agent’s actions and between the agent and the social state. For example, BUYER and SELLER may concurrently attempt an RFQ and Quote by generating the same binding for ID 

but different bindings for item (since they both have sayso over item ). In Langshaw, the saysos over the same attribute must be prioritized over agents (indicated by >): here, by Line 12:, BUYER ’s sayso (being ranked higher) dominates .Consequently, its attempt succeeds (updates the social state) whereas SELLER ’s attempt fails (is a noop). If only one agent attempts any actions, then all its attempts succeed and become part of the social state. If two or more agents attempt actions, exactly those of their collected at-tempts succeed where for each attribute not already bound in the social state, the attempting role has the highest sayso of all the roles concurrently attempting to produce a bind-ing for that attribute. When attempts dominate each other (on different attributes), neither affects the social state. For ex-ample, if BUYER and SELLER concurrently attempt Accept 

and Quote by each generating item and price for the same ID ,both attempts fail because BUYER ’s sayso dominates for item 

whereas SELLER ’s sayso dominates for price .Line 16: and those following specify pairwise conflicts be-tween actions. Accept and Reject conflict, meaning that they are mutually exclusive for the same bindings of ID . But since they are both actions of BUYER , it can choose either one. Line 19: and those following specify an asymmetric con-flict. Once Reject is in the social state, Instruct may not be performed. Importantly, Instruct may precede or occur simul-taneously with Reject . This constraint is not needed in Pur-chase but we insert it to explain the construct. Consider safety . Concurrent conflicting attempts by two agents can succeed, resulting in an inconsistent social state. A safe protocol prevents such attempts. Purchase is safe. Ac-cept and Reject are both actions of BUYER , which means that if BUYER does one, it cannot do the other. Reject and Deliver 

are actions of BUYER and SHIPPER , respectively, but there is no social state in which both can be attempted concurrently. To do Deliver , SHIPPER needs to know the binding address ,which can only happen if BUYER does Accept , which rules out Reject because it would be a local conflict at BUYER .Let protocol Unsafe Purchase be obtained from Listing 1 by omitting Line 17:: thus, both Accept and Reject may oc-cur. Suppose Accept has occurred, followed by Instruct . Now the social state is such that Reject and Deliver may both be at-tempted concurrently by BUYER and SHIPPER , respectively. Both BUYER and SHIPPER will succeed, thus violating the specified nono between Reject and Deliver .Consider liveness . Line 3: gives a completion criterion for 

Purchase ’s enactments as a list of attributes or disjunctions of attributes; one or more of which are designated ⌜key ⌝ and distinguish enactments. Specifically, it says that an enactment of Purchase , as identified by a binding for ID , is complete when a binding exists for either Reject or Deliver .A protocol violates liveness if at least one of its enactments fails to complete. Purchase has two alternative branches for an enactment, one ending with Reject and the other ending with Deliver . Thus, on each branch, Purchase ’s completion criterion is satisfied, which means Purchase is live. Nonlive-ness could result from too little sayso or where the saysos induce a cyclic information dependency between the actions. 

# 4 Formal Semantics 

Semantic tableaux [Fitting, 1999] are a computational repre-sentation for proofs. Each node is a social state of the system, and the transitions are the successful concurrent actions at-tempted. Each tableau captures all possible enactments of a protocol: one per branch beginning from the root. Our se-mantics (Figure 1) is framed as inference rules to derive all possible transitions. Section 5 gives heuristics to produce a small tableau, i.e., a tractable model of a protocol. Figure 1 lists the inference rules for our semantics, based on propositional logic. Below, m is an instance x : m[⃗a]

where ⃗a is its entire set of attributes. We write x : m[⃗ k,⃗ p] or 

m[⃗ k,⃗ p] to mean role x performs m with attributes ⃗p and key attributes ⃗ k ⊆⃗p. We omit the role where it is clear. S captures the social state. Yx,y a means x has higher sayso over a than 

y (both x and y have sayso). Yx a means x has sayso over a of whatever priority. Braces { } capture sets. Subscripts on sets and operators capture the obvious indices and ranges. An in-stance mi[⃗ki,⃗ p i] fits m[⃗ k,⃗ p] if and only if their common key attributes have the same bindings, i.e., mi[⃗ki ∩⃗ k] = m[⃗ ki ∩⃗ k].In Z-SOCIAL , Z captures what bindings can be inferred from the social state relative to a (potential or actual) message instance. For an instance m[⃗k,⃗ p], the bindings of its attributes occurring in a fitting instance in the present social state can be inferred (i.e., are known). Z-SUBSET and Z-UNION state that Z bindings are closed under subset and union. In A TTEMPT , an instance is attemptable by x if (1) it in-cludes any bindings already established (for the key) in the social state and (2) x has sayso over the remaining attributes. In A BIDE , an instance abides by another if: if the bindings of their common key attributes agree, then the bindings of all their common attributes also agree. Any nono and nogo 

constraints are ignored here and captured in F EASIBLE .UNSOCIAL -M states that an instance is unsocial (i.e., so-cially inconsistent) if there is an instance in the social state with which it does not abide. U NSOCIAL -N states that an in-stance is unsocial if an instance in the social state has a nono 

or a nogo (asymmetric) constraint toward that instance. FEASIBLE -1 states that an instance is feasible if (1) it is attemptable and (2) its attribute bindings are not inconsistent with the social state. In F EASIBLE , a set of instances is feasi-ble if each instance is feasible and for each pair of instances performed by the same role, they are not related by a nono and each instance in a pair abides by the other. This is a crucial design decision in Langshaw: Feasibility avoids only local Z-SOCIAL 

S mi[⃗a i] mi[⃗a i] fits m[⃗a]

Z(m[⃗a],⃗ a i ∩⃗a)

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

Z-SUBSET 

Z(m[⃗a],⃗ q i)⃗ q ⊆⃗q i

Z(m[⃗a],⃗ q)

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

Z-UNION 

{Z(m[⃗a],⃗ q i)}ni=1 

Z(m[⃗a], ∪ ni=1 ⃗q i)

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

ATTEMPT 

Z(m[⃗k,⃗ p],⃗ q) ¬ Z(m[⃗ k,⃗ p],⃗ y) Y x⃗y

attemptable x : m[⃗ k,⃗ q ∪⃗y]

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

ABIDE 

mi[⃗a i] fits m[⃗a] → m i[⃗p i ∩⃗p] = m[⃗p i ∩⃗p]

mi[⃗a i] abides m[⃗a]

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

UNSOCIAL -M S mi[⃗a i] ¬ mi abides m

unsocial m[⃗a]

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

UNSOCIAL -N 

S mi[⃗a i] mi[⃗a i] fits m[⃗a]

nogo (mi, m ) ∨ nono (mi, m )

unsocial m[⃗a]

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

FEASIBLE -1 attemptable m[⃗a] ¬ unsocial m[⃗a]

feasible m[⃗a]

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

FEASIBLE 

{feasible xi : mi[⃗a i]}ni=1 

∧xi=xj ¬ nono (mi, m j ) ∧ mi abides mj

feasible {xi : mi[⃗a i]}ni=1 

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

DOMINATES 

mi[⃗a i] fits m[⃗a] p ∈⃗a i ∩⃗a

¬ Z(m[⃗a], p ) Y xi,x pxi : mi[⃗a i] dominates x : m[⃗a]

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

JOINT 

feasible {mi[⃗a i]}ni=1 ∧i̸=j ¬ mi dominates mj

jointly -feasible {xi : mi[⃗a i]}ni=1 

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

COMMUNICATION jointly -feasible {mi[⃗a i]}ni=1 

S xi : mi[ai]ni=1 

> Figure 1: Synchronous semantics for Langshaw.

incompatibilities. A protocol may be incorrect (e.g., unsafe) because of nono conflicts across roles. Since such errors can-not be avoided in a decentralized architecture, proper sayso sare essential in a protocol that remains correct in asynchrony. DOMINATES captures that mi dominates m if they have the same bindings for their common key attributes, a common 

unbound attribute p, and xi has sayso priority on p over x.(Thus, mi and m can dominate each other.) Dominance goes away once the conflicting sayso attribute ( y above) is bound. JOINT states that a feasible set of instances whose mem-bers do not dominate another is jointly feasible . If mi and 

m dominate each other, at most one can be part of a jointly feasible set. Note that joint feasibility is closed under subsets. 

4.1 Generating Enactments from a Tableau 

The preceding rules (dotted lines) show inference within a single social state: no S assertions are inferred, hence no state change. C OMMUNICATION (solid line) shows the progress of time. A set of jointly feasible actions may be concurrently performed and the resulting social state records each of the actions as having occurred via S assertions. A tableau begins from a root node—no S assertion. Any action there relies entirely on its performer’s sayso. Under COMMUNICATION , each jointly feasible set forks a tableau branch. Where a branch terminates (i.e., at a state with no more feasible actions) forms a unique history. 

4.2 Verifying Correctness Properties 

Properties of interest, e.g., liveness and safety, are concerned with the reachability or otherwise of a state through an enact-ment. These properties are expressed via propositional com-binations of the actions (and attributes). We assert a property at the root. A consistent branch that ends provides an example of the property at the root. A branch that hits a contradiction is closed ; a tableau closes if all its branches close, which in-dicates the property is inconsistent and its negation is proved. For liveness, we derive a formula from its what line—for the simple case, this means each protocol attribute becomes bound. To this end, we expand the social state to include bound attributes. For example, from S Deliver we can infer 

S ID and S item . A liveness violation occurs precisely when at least one of the attributes remains unbound. For example, in Listing 1, ¬ S ID ∨ (¬ S Reject ∧ ¬ S Deliver ). A consistent branch is a counterexample since our formula is negated. But if every branch closes, liveness is established .For safety, an integrity violation is when two actions of dif-ferent performers with a nono constraint occur. In Listing 1, 

Reject and Deliver are such actions. A safety violation occurs for any such pair of actions. The negation of this property means that safety is preserved. We place the negated prop-erty, ¬ S Reject ∨ ¬ S Deliver , at the root of the tableau. If any branch of the tableau closes, i.e., runs into a contradic-tion, we determine that safety is violated .

Theorem 1. Liveness and safety properties based as above on the what and nono parts of a protocol are verified by negating and checking for contradiction. Argument . Follows from the construction of the tableau. 

# 5 Reducing the Tableau 

A tableau produced naively would include a branch for ev-ery jointly feasible set of actions at a state (node), leading to an exponential explosion of mostly redundant information. If we take the branches as individual actions, we will end up unrolling every feasible interleaving of the actions, also leading to an exponential explosion. How can we effectively reduce that redundancy? Our idea is to consolidate branches where possible and retain enough (heuristically, typically a few) branches to cover all semantically distinct possibilities. 5.1 How Actions Relate in a Protocol 

Three cases are relevant. First, mutually unrelated pairs of ac-tions may occur in any combination or order. We can discard all but one branch in which they are performed: a single-shot concurrent performance would lead to a shallower tableau, but any arbitrary interleaving would produce the same social state. Second, where one action enables another, the tableau would simply unfold such that an action would not become attemptable unless the right S assertions were present. Third, where two actions may interfere with each other, we must include enough branches in the tableau so that each alternative is included. We capture potential interference as 

hampers below. If an action m1 may disable m2 (as based on a nono or a nogo ) or prevent its concurrent performance (as based on sayso priority), we must include both possibilities with m1 or m2 going first and the other action being disabled or allowed later. We must recognize such cases even if one of the actions is not presently enabled and make sure we do not prematurely eliminate it. Figure 2 formalizes this reasoning. In E NABLE , action xi : mi enables action x : m if mi is a potential precursor to m. That is, x lacks sayso on some attribute p of m that is not established from the social state (i.e., ¬ Z(m[⃗a], p )) but x i has sayso on p and p appears in 

mi. Action mi enables action m if there is a chain of one or more direct enablements from mi to m. C HAIN expresses that enablement is transitively closed. Action mi may hamper action m in two ways. The first case is if there is a nono or a nogo assertion involving mi and 

m. Accept and Reject and Reject and Deliver are examples. BLOCK captures this case. The second case is when xi has priority over x for an attribute p that is not yet established in the social state, exactly as specified by dominates . Quote and 

Accept is an example pair. D ELAY captures this case. FUTURE extends hampers to accommodate future (poten-tial) interference. Action mi hampers action m if mi hampers action mj and m enables mj .

5.2 Computing Jointly Feasible Sets of Actions 

Identify all feasible actions at a state. Next, group these ac-tions into jointly feasible sets, reflecting two intuitions. First, [Colors] when an action hampers another, the tableau must include both orders and maximally group nonhampering actions to reduce its size. To this end, create a graph whose vertices are the feasible actions and an edge indicates one 

hampers another. A coloring [Br´ elaz, 1979] finds sets of ver-tices with no edge between them. Each set is jointly feasible (no action in a set hampers another), but maximality maps to minimum graph coloring, which is NP-Hard. We apply Br´ elaz’s polynomial-time approximation to compute Colors. Second, [Concs] when an action hampers another, the two can be performed concurrently if they have different perform-ers, there is a nono between them ( nogo s are OK), and neither performer dominates the other on some unbound attribute that is common to the actions. This gives the set Concs. We construct a reduced tableau by including branches whose action sets are in Colors ∪ Concs. 

Theorem 2. A reduced tableau is closed for a property con-structed from Boolean combinations of S assertions if and only if the full tableau is closed for that property. 

ENABLE 

mi[⃗a i] fits m[⃗a] ¬ Z(m[⃗a], p )

Yxi p ¬Yx p p ∈⃗p i ∩⃗pxi : mi[⃗a i] enables x : m[⃗a]

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

CHAIN 

mi[⃗a i] enables m[⃗a] m[⃗a] enables m j [⃗a j ]

mi[⃗a i] enables mj [⃗a j ]

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

BLOCK 

mi[⃗a i] fits m[⃗a]

nono (mi, m ) ∨ nogo (mi, m )

xi : mi[⃗a i] hampers x : m[⃗a]

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

DELAY 

xi : mi[⃗a i] dominates x : m[⃗a]

xi : mi[⃗a i] hampers x : m[⃗a]

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

FUTURE 

mi[⃗a i] hampers mj [⃗a j ] m[⃗a] enables m j [⃗a j ]

mi[⃗a i] hampers m[⃗a]

·· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·

> Figure 2: Reasoning about enablement and interference.

Argument . If: All branches in a reduced tableau are jointly feasible and occur in the full tableau. Only if: A branch closes based on the S assertions on it. Since the nogo and 

sayso constraints are incorporated into the tableau construc-tion of Figure 1, the only closures (contradictions) observed on a branch pertain to nono constraints. Suppose the reduced tableau lacks an equivalent branch. By Concs, it must include branches for the nono constraints, let S m be the first asser-tion that it does not include. Therefore, it must include an action S m′ that disables S m. By our coloring construction, that means S m should have been in a different color from 

S m′. Therefore, there is a branch including S m on which no 

S m′ precedes it. Hence, we have a contradiction. Theorem 2 is important because it means all verification of properties based on S (including safety and liveness, as seen in Section 4.2) can be carried out on a reduced tableau. 

# 6 Compilation into Asynchronous Protocols 

For concreteness, we adopt BSPL for specifying asyn-chronous messaging protocols. As Listing 2 shows, a BSPL protocol lists roles, a completion criterion, and one or more messages. Each message specifies information dependencies via adornments ⌜in ⌝ , ⌜out ⌝ , and ⌜nil ⌝ . Each role has a lo-cal state and may send a message only if it is compatible with its local state. Specifically, let m be a message schema 

x 7 → y : m[⃗p I ,⃗ p O ,⃗ p N ], where ⃗p I ,⃗ p O ,⃗ p N are sets of its pa-rameters adorned ⌜in ⌝ , ⌜out ⌝ , and ⌜nil ⌝ , respectively. An instance of m is a message that has bindings only for the 

⌜in ⌝ and ⌜out ⌝ parameters; x may send an instance of m only if the bindings of the ⌜in ⌝ parameters are known (already present in its local state), bindings of the ⌜out ⌝ parameters are unknown (but added to the local state upon sending), bindings of the ⌜nil ⌝ parameters are unknown (and not added to the lo-cal state). For example, to send an Accept , BUYER must know  

> ID

and item and not know price . Moreover, Accept and Reject Listing 2 A simple protocol to explain BSPL constructs.  

> 1:

Accept − R e j e c t / / P r o t o c o l name  

> 2:

r o l e s B , S / / r o l e s Buyer and S e l l e r  

> 3:

p a r a m e t e r s out ID key , out done / / c o m p l e t i o n c r i t e r i o n  

> 4:

S 7 → B : O f f e r [ out ID key , out i t e m , out 

p r i c e ] / / Message  

> 5:

B 7 → S : A c c e p t [ in ID key , in i t e m , in 

p r i c e , out done ]  

> 6:

B 7 → S : R e j e c t [ in ID key , in i t e m , in 

p r i c e , out done ] SEND Kx⃗p I ¬Kx⃗p O ¬Kx⃗p N

Lx(x 7 → y : m[⃗p I ,⃗ p O ,⃗ p N ]) Kx⃗p O

RECEIVE Lx(r = x 7 → y : m[⃗p I ,⃗ p O ,⃗ p N ]) 

Ly r Ky⃗p I Ky⃗p O

> Figure 3: Asynchronous semantics for BSPL.

are mutually exclusive because each includes done as ⌜out ⌝ .Figure 3 shows Singh and Christie’s (2021) tableau-based asynchronous semantics of BSPL. Each tableau branch (se-quence of message send and receive events) is an enactment. 

Kx captures that x knows specified parameter bindings. Lx

means x sent or received a message, simulating a channel. Initially, each role knows no bindings. What is known to each role grows monotonically: the bindings are immutable, and each message sent and received adds to a role’s knowledge. In S END , an instance of x 7 → y : m[⃗p I ,⃗ p O ,⃗ p N ] is enabled for emission by x if and only if x knows ⃗p I but does not know ⃗p O or ⃗p N . Concomitantly with the emission, the sender pro-duces and comes to know the bindings for ⃗p O . In R ECEIVE , a message from x to y is enabled for reception by y if and only if x has (previously) sent that message. Concomitantly with reception, y comes to know the bindings for ⃗p I and ⃗p O .Each tableau branch takes up one of the allowed observa-tions (emission or reception of a message) and maps to an enactment. A tableau contains all possible observation orders. 

6.1 Compiling Langshaw 

We now describe how to compile Langshaw specifications into BSPL in a manner that respects the demands of asyn-chrony. Langshaw roles map to BSPL roles, attributes to pa-rameters, actions to messages, saysos to data flows, and nonos to integrity constraints. Resolving the saysos and nonos re-quires parameters and messages not present in Langshaw. 

Completion Requirements. Langshaw completion re-quirements are a sequence of disjunctive clauses. Each at-tribute (atom in a clause) yields a BSPL parameter of the same name. Each disjunction is replaced by a parameter rep-resenting the achievement of any of its terms. When generat-ing protocol messages, we append messages that are enabled when any of the clause terms is completed to notify each role that the clause is satisfied. Listing 3 (full version online; URL below) shows some lines generated from Purchase . The what line yields two 

Listing 3 Purchase: Completion requirements.  

> 1:

p a r a m e t e r s out ID key , out done0  

> 2:

. . .  

> 3:

Buyer 7 → S e l l e r : R e j e c t # done0 [ in ID key 

, in R e j e c t , out done0 ]   

> Buyer Seller (S)
> RFQ[nil item, out item@S]
> Quote[in item@S, out item]
> Buyer Seller (S)
> RFQ[out item, nil item@S]
> Quote[nil item@S, in item]
> Figure 4: Sayso delegation pattern showing alternative enactments.

clauses. ID maps to BSPL parameter ID . And, Reject or De-liver maps to done0 . Each role gets a message for each of its actions. We also create messages to convey important facts to other roles: e.g., Reject maps to messages indicating that the primary Reject has been sent and the what line satisfied. 

Generating Messages from Actions. Each action yields a BSPL message schema, whose sender is the performer and whose receiver is a role that needs the content of the message. • Each attribute (including the attributes reifying the ac-tions) becomes a message parameter. • The adornment of each parameter depends on whether the action’s role (message’s sender) has sayso .• Each combination of parameter adornments yields a dif-ferent morph , i.e., message schema variant. • The above possibilities are constrained via a series of filters to remove incorrect and redundant combinations. 

Modeling Sayso in BSPL. We model sayso in BSPL via 

delegation . That is, since B UYER has priority over S ELLER 

to bind item , it must either bind item , or bind a newly added 

delegation parameter (item@Seller ) to empower S ELLER to bind it. Conversely, S ELLER cannot bind item until B UYER 

has delegated that authority. Figure 4 illustrates the delegation pattern with message sequence diagrams. The pattern is in-herently asymmetric: traditionally the priorities are arbitrary [Mattern, 1990] whereas our priorities have a social basis. 

Filtering Out Improper Schemas. The above steps pro-duce redundant or incorrect morphs. We apply a series of filters to exclude such cases. For instance, reasoning about causality is needed to ensure enactability and reasoning about priority to avoid race conditions. 

Conflicts and Data Flow. To generate BSPL messages, we model a nono constraint by adding ⌜nil ⌝ parameters to each of the conflicting messages. For example, in Purchase , the Re-ject and Deliver actions conflict, so we add nil Deliver to each generated Reject morph, and nil Reject to each gen-erated Deliver morph, as shown in Listing 4. Likewise, we model a nogo constraint ( a̸ → b) by placing a ⌜nil ⌝ parameter on the message for the disabled action, i.e., b[. . . ⌜nil ⌝ a]. This approach echoes the idea of disabling an action until informa-tion is received to proceed [Singh, 1996]. Listing 4 Realizing the Reject and Deliver conflict.  

> 1:

B 7 → S : R e j e c t [ in ID key , in Quote , out 

R e j e c t , nil Accept , nil Deliver ] 

> 2:

Sh 7 → S : D e l i v e r [ in ID key , in 

I n s t r u c t , in i t e m , in a d d r e s s , out 

D e l i v e r , nil Reject ]Next, we model the protocol’s data flow by specifying the recipients of each message schema. A role can observe any attribute (including an action) that features in an action it can perform and any attribute present in the what line of the pro-tocol. Information is shared at the granularity of actions, not attributes piecemeal, so we determine which roles can see what action. We generate a separate message schema for each of the desired data flows. Since BSPL does not support mul-ticast, we emulate any multicast with separate messages. The first message schema (to one role) has the relevant param-eters as ⌜out ⌝ ; message schemas to other roles include the same parameters as ⌜in ⌝ . As described above, every message is given a least one ⌜out ⌝ parameter. 

Theorem 3. For any asynchronous messaging enactment produced by a BSPL protocol generated through our method, there is a corresponding synchronous enactment produced by the Langshaw semantics. Argument . We derive messages using Langshaw’s semantics. Each action maps to a message and each attribute to a param-eter with the constraints ( nono , nogo , and sayso dominance) via crafted ⌜nil ⌝ parameters. We filter the schemas accord-ing to rules derived from the delegation model of sayso , i.e., constraining the available actions according to D OMINATES .Thus, the generated BSPL protocol allows moves correspond-ing to any Langshaw action. Due to our filters, it cannot make any moves prevented by the sayso constraints. Although Langshaw allows concurrent actions and BSPL does not al-low multicast, the effect of multicast is achieved through ad-ditional messages: such messages can be delayed, as allowed by the BSPL’s asynchronous semantics, but not disabled. We capture Langshaw’s disjunctive completion requirements via messages producing a designated parameter. 

6.2 Empirical Results 

We implemented our verifier for Langshaw protocols in Python. Table 2 shows the performance (averaged over 10 runs) of testing liveness (including the time for constructing a tableau) for several protocols from the literature. The times for safety are similar, though slightly faster in most cases. The results show that the Langshaw verifier is effective. The node and branch numbers are sometimes fractions, due to unordered sets in the implementation randomizing the se-lection and thus producing different numbers of nodes and branches in different runs of the verifier. 

# 7 Discussion: Conclusion and Perspectives 

Specifying coordination constraints for MAS can be nontriv-ial. Langshaw’s abstractions force a designer to think of coor-dination in social terms. The synchronous semantics provides a simplified model for a MAS engineer while maintaining the 

Protocol Nodes Branches Time (ms) 

Redelegation 4 1 3.5 

Unsafe Purchase 49.5 19.9 901.5 

PO-. . . -Ship 12.3 2.4 92.6 

Either-Offer 3 1 1.5 

Refund 12.2 4.6 99.0 

Purchase 28.2 8.1 480.1 

Unsafe 5 3 3.2 

Block-Contra 3 1 0.8 

Nonlive 1 1 0.2 

CompositeKey 3 1 2.5 

RFQ-Quote 6 2 6.5 

Rescind 7.5 2.5 23.7 

Block-Contra v2 17 8 25.8          

> Table 2: Statistics of Langshaw protocol liveness verification. Pur-chase ,Unsafe Purchase , and Nonlive are as specified above. The re-maining protocols are in the online supplement (URL below). Time to verify is given in milliseconds. All except Unsafe Purchase and
> Unsafe were safe; all except Nonlive were live. Our experimental rig was an ASUS Zenbook S13 with an AMD Ryzen 7 6800U CPU and 16GB of LPDDR5 RAM, running Linux.

realism and power of asynchrony in that conflicting action at-tempts by multiple agents may succeed though they violate a nono constraint. Thus, it does not obviate correctness con-cerns arising in asynchrony and thereby facilitates translation to an asynchronous protocol. For now, the best approach to implement agents to partici-pate in Langshaw protocols is to (1) verify a Langshaw proto-col; (2) compile it to BSPL; and (3) apply a BSPL program-ming model such as Kiko [Christie et al. , 2023]. Research into native programming models for Langshaw is needed. Both BDI-based and the newer hypermedia-based program-ming models [Vachtsevanou et al. , 2023] are promising as direct programming models for Langshaw because they nat-urally complement Langshaw’s information orientation. The engineering MAS community has long debated the relative merits of synchrony and asynchrony [Singh, 1999]. Langshaw bypasses some of the debate by showing that a syn-chronous semantics can be a pathway to asynchrony. Popular approaches provide constructs such as artifacts [Ricci et al. ,2009] or the environment [Weyns et al. , 2007] that provide a unitary view of the state of a MAS. Though they may be ac-cessed through low-level asynchronous means, their unitary view reflects a central point. Blockchain provides a shared state between otherwise independent entities [Mendling et al. ,2018]. Langshaw’s synchronous semantics provides a basis for interaction governed by sayso, which is more conducive to business meaning [Christie et al. , 2021] than arbitrary or-dering, and enables maximal concurrency given a protocol. Theoretical studies of protocols, e.g., [Mallya and Singh, 2007; Ferrando et al. , 2019], may need to be revisited in light of Langshaw. Further, the problem of verifying protocol-based agents [Baldoni et al. , 2006] remains largely unad-dressed for information-based representations. 

Online supplement. The code and all examples are avail-able online at https://gitlab.com/masr/langshaw Acknowledgments 

Thanks to the anonymous reviewers for helpful comments. Thanks to the NSF (grant IIS-1908374) and EPSRC (grant EP/N027965/1) for support. 

# References 

[Austin, 1962] John L. Austin. How to Do Things with Words . Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1962. [Baldoni et al. , 2006] Matteo Baldoni, Cristina Baroglio, Al-berto Martelli, and Viviana Patti. A priori conformance verification for guaranteeing interoperability in open envi-ronments. In Proceedings of the 4th International Con-ference on Service-Oriented Computing (ICSOC) , LNCS, pages 339–351. Springer, December 2006. [Baldoni et al. , 2014] Matteo Baldoni, Cristina Baroglio, Elisa Marengo, Viviana Patti, and Federico Capuzzimati. Engineering commitment-based business protocols with the 2CL methodology. Journal of Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (JAAMAS) , 28(4):519–557, July 2014. [Baldoni et al. , 2023] Matteo Baldoni, Cristina Baroglio, Roberto Micalizio, and Stefano Tedeschi. Accountability in multi-agent organizations: From conceptual design to agent programming. Journal of Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (JAAMAS) , 37(1):7, June 2023. [Bellifemine et al. , 2007] Fabio Bellifemine, Giovanni Caire, and Dominic Greenwood. Developing Multi-Agent Systems with JADE . Wiley, Chichester, UK, 2007. [Bergenti et al. , 2020] Federico Bergenti, Giovanni Caire, Stefania Monica, and Agostino Poggi. The first twenty years of agent-based software development with JADE. 

Journal of Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (JAAMAS) , 34(2):36, 2020. [Boissier et al. , 2013] Olivier Boissier, Rafael H. Bordini, Jomi Fred H¨ ubner, Alessandro Ricci, and Andrea Santi. Multi-agent oriented programming with JaCaMo. Science of Computer Programming , 78(6):747–761, June 2013. [Boissier et al. , 2023] Olivier Boissier, Andrei Ciortea, An-dreas Harth, Alessandro Ricci, and Danai Vachtsevanou. Agents on the Web (Dagstuhl seminar 23081). Dagstuhl Reports , 13(2):71–162, 2023. [Br´ elaz, 1979] Daniel Br´ elaz. New methods to color ver-tices of a graph. Communications of the ACM (CACM) ,22(4):251–256, April 1979. [Carriero and Gelernter, 1989] Nicholas Carriero and David Gelernter. Linda in context. Communications of the ACM (CACM) , 32(4):444–458, April 1989. [Cernuzzi and Zambonelli, 2004] Luca Cernuzzi and Franco Zambonelli. Experiencing AUML in the GAIA methodol-ogy. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Enterprise Information Systems (ICEIS) , pages 283–288, Porto, Portugal, April 2004. Science and Technology Pub-lications, Lda. [Chopra and Singh, 2016] Amit K. Chopra and Munindar P. Singh. Custard: Computing norm states over information stores. In Proceedings of the 15th International Confer-ence on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems (AA-MAS) , pages 1096–1105, Singapore, May 2016. IFAA-MAS. [Christie V et al. , 2021] Samuel H. Christie V, Amit K. Chopra, and Munindar P. Singh. Hercule: Representing and reasoning about norms as a foundation for declarative contracts over blockchain. IEEE Internet Computing (IC) ,25(4):67–75, July 2021. [Christie V et al. , 2023] Samuel H. Christie V, Munindar P. Singh, and Amit K. Chopra. Kiko: Programming agents to enact interaction protocols. In Proceedings of the 22nd In-ternational Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS) , pages 1154–1163, London, May 2023. IFAAMAS. [Desai et al. , 2005] Nirmit Desai, Ashok U. Mallya, Amit K. Chopra, and Munindar P. Singh. OWL-P: A methodology for business process modeling and enactment. In Proceed-ings of the AAMAS Workshop on Agent Oriented Informa-tion Systems (AOIS) , Utrecht, The Netherlands, July 2005. [Ferrando et al. , 2017] Angelo Ferrando, Davide Ancona, and Viviana Mascardi. Decentralizing MAS monitoring with DecAMon. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Sys-tems (AAMAS) , pages 239–248, S˜ ao Paulo, May 2017. IFAAMAS. [Ferrando et al. , 2019] Angelo Ferrando, Michael Winikoff, Stephen Cranefield, Frank Dignum, and Viviana Mascardi. On enactability of agent interaction protocols: Towards a unified approach. In Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on Engineering Multi-Agent Systems (EMAS) ,volume 12058 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ,pages 43–64, Montr´ eal, May 2019. Springer. [Fitting, 1999] Melvin Fitting. Introduction. In Marcello D’Agostino, Dov M. Gabbay, Reiner H¨ ahnle, and Joachim Posegga, editors, Handbook of Tableau Methods , chap-ter 1, pages 1–43. Kluwer, 1999. [Mallya and Singh, 2007] Ashok U. Mallya and Munindar P. Singh. An algebra for commitment protocols. Journal of Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (JAAMAS) ,14(2):143–163, April 2007. [Mattern, 1990] Friedemann Mattern. Asynchronous dis-tributed termination—parallel and symmetric solutions with echo algorithms. Algorithmica , 5(3):325–340, June 1990. [Mendling et al. , 2018] Jan Mendling, Ingo Weber, Wil van der Aalst, Jan vom Brocke, Cristina Cabanillas, Flo-rian Daniel, Søren Debois, Claudio Di Ciccio, Marlon Du-mas, Schahram Dustdar, Avigdor Gal, Luciano Garc´ ıa-Ba˜ nuelos, Guido Governatori, Richard Hull, Marcello La Rosa, Henrik Leopold, Frank Leymann, Jan Recker, Man-fred Reichert, Hajo A. Reijers, Stefanie Rinderle-Ma, An-dreas Solti, Michael Rosemann, Stefan Schulte, Munin-dar P. Singh, Tijs Slaats, Mark Staples, Barbara Weber, Matthias Weidlich, Mathias Weske, Xiwei Xu, and Lim-ing Zhu. Blockchains for business process management – challenges and opportunities. ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems (TMIS) , 9(1):4:1–4:16, February 2018. [Padgham and Winikoff, 2005] Lin Padgham and Michael Winikoff. Prometheus: A practical agent-oriented method-ology. In Brian Henderson-Sellers and Paolo Giorgini, editors, Agent-Oriented Methodologies , chapter 5, pages 107–135. Idea Group, Hershey, Pennsylvania, 2005. [Poslad, 2007] Stefan Poslad. Specifying protocols for multi-agent systems interaction. ACM Transactions on Au-tonomous and Adaptive Systems (TAAS) , 2(4):15:1–15:24, 2007. [Ricci et al. , 2009] Alessandro Ricci, Michele Piunti, Mirko Viroli, and Andrea Omicini. Environment programming in CArtAgO. In Rafael H. Bordini, Mehdi Dastani, J¨ urgen Dix, and Amal El Fallah Seghrouchni, editors, Multi-Agent Programming, Languages, Tools and Applications , chap-ter 8, pages 259–288. Springer, Dordrecht, Netherlands, 2009. [Ricci et al. , 2019] Alessandro Ricci, Andrei Ciortea, Simon Mayer, Olivier Boissier, Rafael H. Bordini, and Jomi Fred H¨ ubner. Engineering scalable distributed environments and organizations for MAS. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Mul-tiAgent Systems (AAMAS) , pages 790–798, Montr´ eal, May 2019. IFAAMAS. [Rooney et al. , 2004] Colm Rooney, Rem W. Collier, and Gregory M. P. O’Hare. VIPER: A visual protocol editor. In Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Co-ordination Models and Languages COORDINATION , vol-ume 2949 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 279–293, Pisa, February 2004. Springer. [Sadek et al. , 1997] M. David Sadek, Philippe Bretier, and Franck Panaget. ARTIMIS: Natural dialogue meets ratio-nal agency. In Proceedings of the 15th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) , pages 1030– 1035, Nagoya, Japan, August 1997. Morgan Kaufmann. [Singh and Chopra, 2020] Munindar P. Singh and Amit K. Chopra. Clouseau: Generating communication protocols from commitments. In Proceedings of the 34th Confer-ence on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) , pages 7244–7252, New York, February 2020. AAAI Press. [Singh and Christie V, 2021] Munindar P. Singh and Samuel H. Christie V. Tango: Declarative semantics for multiagent communication protocols. In Proceedings of the 30th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) , pages 391–397, Online, August 2021. IJCAI. [Singh, 1996] Munindar P. Singh. Synthesizing distributed constrained events from transactional workflow specifica-tions. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) , pages 616–623, New Or-leans, February 1996. IEEE. [Singh, 1999] Munindar P. Singh. Write asynchronous, run synchronous. IEEE Internet Computing (IC) , 3(2):4–5, March 1999. Instance of the column Being Interactive .[Singh, 2000] Munindar P. Singh. A social semantics for agent communication languages. In Proceedings of the 1999 IJCAI Workshop on Agent Communication Lan-guages , number 1916 in Lecture Notes in Artificial Intel-ligence, pages 31–45, Berlin, 2000. Springer. [Singh, 2011a] Munindar P. Singh. Information-driven interaction-oriented programming: BSPL, the Blindingly Simple Protocol Language. In Proceedings of the 10th In-ternational Conference on Autonomous Agents and Mul-tiAgent Systems (AAMAS) , pages 491–498, Taipei, May 2011. IFAAMAS. [Singh, 2011b] Munindar P. Singh. LoST: Local State Transfer—An architectural style for the distributed enact-ment of business protocols. In Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS) , pages 57–64, Washington, DC, July 2011. IEEE Computer Soci-ety. [Singh, 2012] Munindar P. Singh. Semantics and verifica-tion of information-based protocols. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems (AAMAS) , pages 1149–1156, Valen-cia, Spain, June 2012. IFAAMAS. [Vachtsevanou et al. , 2023] Danai Vachtsevanou, Andrei Ciortea, Simon Mayer, and J´ er´ emy Lem´ ee. Signifiers as a first-class abstraction in hypermedia multi-agent systems. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems (AAMAS) ,pages 1200–1208, London, May 2023. IFAAMAS. [Vieira et al. , 2007] Renata Vieira, ´Alvaro F. Moreira, Michael J. Wooldridge, and Rafael H. Bordini. On the formal semantics of speech-act based communication in an agent-oriented programming language. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research (JAIR) , 29:221–267, June 2007. [Weyns and Holvoet, 2004] Danny Weyns and Tom Holvoet. A formal model for situated multi-agent systems. Funda-menta Informaticae , 63(2-3):125–158, 2004. [Weyns et al. , 2007] Danny Weyns, Andrea Omicini, and James Odell. Environment as a first class abstraction in multiagent systems. Journal of Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (JAAMAS) , 14(1):5–30, Febru-ary 2007. [Winikoff et al. , 2018] Michael Winikoff, Nitin Yadav, and Lin Padgham. A new Hierarchical Agent Protocol Nota-tion. Journal of Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Sys-tems (JAAMAS) , 32(1):59–133, January 2018. [Winikoff, 2007] Michael Winikoff. Implementing commitment-based interactions. In Proceedings of the 6th International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems (AAMAS) , pages 868–875, Honolulu, May 2007. IFAAMAS.