Title: Customer-Agent: Overcoming Context Limitations in Ultra-Long Shopping Trajectories via Tool-Augmented Agents and RLVR

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.07995v1

Published Time: Tue, 09 Jun 2026 00:30:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
## Customer-Agent: Overcoming Context Limitations in Ultra-Long Shopping Trajectories via Tool-Augmented Agents and RLVR 

Hongye Liu 1,2, Rongmei Lin 1, Anurag Kashyap 1, Hejie Cui 1, Ricardo Henao 2,Besnik Fetahu 1, Bing Yin 1,

> 1

Amazon 2Duke University 

Abstract 

Understanding customer shopping trajectories is essential for enabling personalized shopping experiences. However, shopping records (i.e., customer’s search, clicks, purchases, etc.) of-ten span long time horizons over multiple years, resulting in extremely long trajectories that pose significant challenges for existing large language models (LLMs). Despite the impor-tance of this problem, existing benchmarks are limited to short customer trajectories, while real-world trajectories from large e-commerce platforms are rarely accessible due to data pri-vacy constraints. To address this gap, we intro-duce ShopTrajQA, a long-context evaluation benchmark constructed from real-world prod-uct information and simulated shopping trajec-tories. The dataset includes variants of up to 32k and 64k tokens, enabling systematic evalua-tion of model robustness under varying context lengths. Through comprehensive benchmark-ing of frontier LLMs, we identify critical per-formance gaps in reasoning over long shopping trajectory data. To address these challenges, we propose a Customer Agent Framework for ultra-long context management. Leveraging a Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Re-wards (RLVR) agentic training paradigm, our approach stores trajectories as external local files and trains the agent to autonomously re-trieve and parse them through code-interpreter interactions (e.g., SQL queries), effectively bypassing the fixed in-context window con-straints of LLMs. Experimental results demon-strate that our framework achieves strong per-formance for ShopTrajQA and shows general-ization to other complex reasoning tasks. 

1 Introduction 

Understanding customer shopping trajectories is essential for providing high-quality and personal-ized e-commerce shopping experience. A shopping 

> Work done during an internship at Amazon.

trajectory consists of searches, clicks, and purchase records, which contain rich information about cus-tomer’s preferences and intent. However, in real-world scenarios, these records often span long time periods, leading to extremely long trajectories. An-alyzing them poses a major challenge for frontier large language models (LLMs) due to their fixed in-context window size. Recent studies have shown that reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022) can substantially improve the reason-ing abilities of LLMs by encouraging the genera-tion of structured reasoning processes. Building on this idea, reinforcement learning with verifiable re-wards (RLVR) (Feng et al., 2025; Xie et al., 2025) has emerged as a promising alternative. Instead of relying on a learned reward model, RLVR leverages task-specific, rule-based, verification signals to di-rectly supervise model optimization. By aligning training objectives more closely with downstream tasks, this paradigm has demonstrated strong im-provements in domains such as mathematical rea-soning and code generation. Details of the related work are provided in Appendix A. However, despite these advances, effectively ap-plying RLVR in long-context scenarios and in the shopping domain remains challenging. Extending RLVR naively to ultra-long trajectories by simply including the entire sequence into the model’s in-context window is both computationally expensive and inherently limited. As trajectories approach the upper bounds of modern LLMs’ context windows, the number of tokens that must be attended simul-taneously grows dramatically, leading to quadratic memory and computation costs. This not only makes training and inference inefficient but also de-grades reasoning performance, as the model strug-gles to retrieve and integrate relevant information from distant parts of the trajectory. To address this gap, we introduce ShopTrajQA, a long-context benchmark grounded in realistic 1

> arXiv:2606.07995v1 [cs.CL] 6 Jun 2026 Figure 1: Comparison between ShopTrajQA and OPeRA. The first row illustrates the trajectory generation pipeline and the distribution of user actions. The second row presents a comparison of ShopTrajQA and OPeRA, along with the distributions of the number of products and purchases in each trajectory.

shopping scenarios. The dataset is constructed using real product catalogs combined with LLM-simulated long-horizon user trajectories. To ensure benchmark reliability, each trajectory is generated with verifiable procedures: the LLM is prompted to produce sequences of realistic actions (e.g., searches, clicks, and purchases) that are consistent with product attributes. For QA tasks, correspond-ing answers are generated using a strong reference LLM with tool-assisted verification. This pipeline ensures that the resulting trajectories is internally consistent, while enabling each QA example to be objectively validated. ShopTrajQA provides two context-length variants, reaching up to 32k and 64k tokens, enabling systematic evaluation of model robustness under increasing trajectory lengths. Benchmarking a range of leading LLMs on ShopTrajQA reveals substantial performance degra-dation when long shopping trajectories are directly included in the prompts. As input length increases, models struggle to effectively retrieve relevant in-formation and maintain coherent reasoning. To address this challenge, we propose a Customer Agent Framework that enables models to handle ultra-long contexts through explicit tool interac-tions. Instead of including the entire trajectory into the prompt, our framework stores context as exter-nal local files and allows the agent to selectively retrieve and parse relevant information through tool usage. This design improves reasoning in two ways. 

i) Instead of requiring the model to process an en-tire long trajectory at once, our framework retrieves only small, relevant fragments for reasoning. When a long sequence is directly included in the context window, the model must simultaneously identify relevant information and perform reasoning, which can degrade its ability to effectively retrieve and utilize useful signals. By leveraging tools to selec-tively retrieve relevant pieces of context, the model can focus more on reasoning rather than searching through large amounts of redundant text. ii ) By storing trajectories as external files and retrieving them on demand, the framework is no longer con-strained by the model’s native context-length limit. In principle, the approach can scale to extremely long contexts, potentially millions or even billions of tokens. This depends on the capacity of the ex-ternal storage system, which is significantly larger than typical model context windows. Our contributions are summarized as follows: • We introduce ShopTrajQA, a novel long-context QA benchmark for the shopping domain with 32k and 64k token variants. Extensive bench-marking of mainstream LLMs across different model scales reveal key performance bottlenecks in processing long shopping trajectories. • We propose a Customer Agent Framework 

that includes a verifiable supervised fine-tuning (SFT) data synthesis pipeline to teach models multi-turn tool use, along with a tool-based rea-soning mechanism that interacts with external-ized context files. This integrated SFT-RL frame-work effectively overcomes context-length limi-tations and substantially improves reasoning per-formance for long documents. • Experiments on ShopTrajQA and additional five reasoning benchmarks demonstrate that our framework achieves strong performance and gen-eralization. 2Figure 2: Retrieval QA Construction: the model generates and verifies executable QA from shopping trajectory data. 

2 Data Construction 

In this section, we describe the construction of ShopTrajQA, a QA dataset designed for long shop-ping trajectories. Grounded in real-world product information, we simulate long-term shopping tra-jectories using LLMs, where each trajectory con-sists of sequences of realistic user actions (searches, clicks, and purchases) that are consistent with prod-uct attributes and plausible user behavior patterns. Retrieval-based questions are generated along-side executable code command (e.g., SQL queries). A code interpreter is used to automatically verifies both the command syntax and the correctness of the resulting answer, ensuring dataset consistency and reliability. Compared with existing shopping datasets, ShopTrajQA features substantially longer trajectories and greater product diversity, making it a challenging benchmark for long-context rea-soning. We further provide multiple dataset vari-ants with different trajectory lengths to systemat-ically evaluate model performance under varying context sizes, supporting research on tool-assisted reasoning and long-horizon decision-making in e-commerce environments. 

2.1 Long Shopping Trajectory Simulation 

OPeRA (Wang et al., 2025c) is a public shopping-trajectory dataset that serves as a baseline for this work. However, it has two key limitations. Since the data was collected in an academic setting, the user group is mostly limited to students and re-searchers. As a result, the users in OPeRA have similar income levels and shopping habits, which leads to limited diversity in product categories and shopping behavioral patterns. Furthermore, the tra-jectories in OPeRA are relatively short, limiting its suitability for evaluating long-context reasoning and behavioral understanding. Nevertheless, while OPeRA’s user demographics are limited, the dis-tribution of user actions (e.g., search, click, and purchase patterns) still provides a useful reference for realistic shopping behaviors. To address the above limitations, we construct a new dataset by leveraging product query data from the public ESCI dataset (Reddy et al., 2022). ESCI contains around 130 thousand unique queries and 2.6 million manually labeled (query, product) rele-vance judgments, together with rich product meta-data such as product IDs, titles, and brand informa-tion. The large scale and diversity of product infor-mation significantly expand the space of possible interactions during trajectory generation. Guided by the action distribution observed in OPeRA, we prompt an LLM to generate long-horizon shopping trajectories using ESCI product query data. The generation follows a predefined schema shown in Appendix G.2. The rich product space enables the simulation process to explore a broader range of shopping intents and product categories, leading to more diverse user profiles and trajectories. To facilitate the evaluation of long-context capa-bilities, we construct two versions of the dataset with maximum context lengths of 32k and 64k to-kens. The 32k version is obtained by truncating tra-jectories from the 64k version. Figure 1 illustrates the differences between ShopTrajQA and OPeRA. Compared to OPeRA, ShopTrajQA provides sub-stantially longer trajectories and a more diverse set of product information, making it better suited for studying long-context understanding in the shop-ping domain. We report the data distribution details in Appendix C.4. 

2.2 Retrieval QA Construction 

Based on the generated shopping trajectories, we leverage an LLM to generate verifiable question-answer pairs, which are then used to construct the ShopTrajQA benchmark. Verifiable means that each generated question includes a corresponding executable command ( e.g. , SQL, regex, or other programmatic queries) that can retrieve the answer directly from the underlying shopping trajectory. The workflow is illustrated in Figure 2. We prompt the model to produce a question along with a code command that can be executed to obtain the answer. We then validate each example by running the generated command through a code 3Input Question 

Trajectory file: trajectory_53.txt Question: Which product_type has the highest average price among clicked products? 

LLM Policy 

Trajectory Context Context File 

> 2024-05-01 08:15:32 type [Search Amazon | kids hair accessories] 2024-05-01 09:22:18 type [Search Amazon | toddler headbands] 2024-05-01 10:05:44 type [Search Amazon | little girl headbands ages 2-6] 2024-05-01 10:18:27 click [B014M70JDY | Roewell Baby Elastic Hair Hoops Headbands and Girl's Fashion Soft Headbands] (brand: Roewell, color: 6 Pack Set3, price: $12.99, product_types: HAIRBAND) 2024-05-01 10:22:15 type [Search Amazon | power rangers dvd] 2024-05-01 10:35:41 type [Search Amazon | power rangers season 1]
> File reading tool File parsing tool Search tool

Tool 

Output Rollout 

> <think> The user wants to find the 'product_type' with the highest average price among 'click' events. I need to load the data from trajectory '53', inspect the schema to confirm column names, and then execute a SQL query to calculate the result. </think> <code> from data_loader import load_trajectory, sql_query conn, df = load_trajectory('53') print('Columns:', df.columns.tolist()) </code> <Interpreter> Columns: ['row_id', 'timestamp', 'action_type', 'asin', 'product_name', 'brand', 'color', 'product_types', 'price', 'search_query'] </Interpreter> <think> The inspection shows the column name is 'product_types' (plural), not 'product_type'. I will now write a SQL query to filter for 'click' actions, group by 'product_types', calculate the average price, and order by the average price in descending order. </think> <code> sql_query_command = """ SELECT product_types, AVG(price) AS avg_price FROM events WHERE action_type = 'click' GROUP BY product_types ORDER BY avg_price DESC LIMIT 1; """ validate_true, sql_result = sql_query(conn, sql_query_command) print('SQL Result:', sql_result) </code> <Interpreter> SQL Result: [('INTEGRATED_STEREO_SYSTEM', 1299.99)] </Interpreter> <think> The query was successful. The product type 'INTEGRATED_STEREO_SYSTEM' has the highest average price of 1299.99 among all clicked products. I will now provide the final answer. </think> <answer> INTEGRATED_STEREO_SYSTEM </answer>

Figure 3: Customer-Agent framework. Red text denotes shopping trajectory information. 

executor to ensure that i) the command executes successfully and ii ) the returned result matches the provided answer. By requiring each example to include an executable, verifiable command and validating its correctness, we improve the qual-ity and reliability of the constructed data. These question-answer pairs constitute a benchmark for evaluating a model’s ability to answer questions in the shopping domain. Details of this benchmark are reported in Appendix C. 

3 Method 

In this section, we present our agentic framework designed to handle long contexts. We begin by for-malizing the inherent limitations of current models when processing long contexts. To address these constraints, we propose a mechanism that stores context as local files and trains the model to interact with these external resources via tool-use, thereby enhancing both efficiency and reliability. We then describe our strategy for generating SFT datasets in the cold-start tool calling stage. Finally, we elab-orate on the details of RL finetuning. Figure 3 provides an overview of the agent framework. 

3.1 Problem Definition 

Let G = πθ(P ) denote the process of prompting a policy model πθ to generate a response G. Typ-ically, a prompt P consists of two components: the context (e.g. , a customer shopping trajectory) and a question . However, as the context length scales, inference efficiency degrades substantially and may eventually surpass the architectural con-straints of the model’s maximum context window. To address this issue, we decouple the context from the question by offloading the former to local stor-age. In this paradigm, the model functions as an agent that interacts with local context files through code-interpreter–integrated reasoning. By program-matically accessing externalized files, the model selectively retrieves relevant information to support its reasoning process, thereby effectively bypassing fixed context-length constraints. Consequently, it is essential for the model to acquire this integrated reasoning and tool-use capability. We formulate code-interpreter-integrated reason-ing as a reinforcement learning problem with in-terleaved tool execution. The system consists of a policy model πθ, which generates reasoning text and code snippets, a code interpreter CI , which executes the generated code and returns results or errors, and an environment that provides the ques-tion q along with ground-truth answers a.At each time step t, the policy model generates either the reasoning text gt or the code ct. When the code termination trigger </code> is detected, generation pauses, the code within <code></code> 

tags is sent to the code interpreter CI , and feed-back ft (results or errors) is returned within the 

<interpreter></interpreter> tags. The feed-back ft is concatenated with the most recent gen-eration gt ⊕ ct and fed back to the model as input to generate the next reasoning text gt+1 . This pro-cess continues until the model produces the final answer o without detecting code, forming a hybrid trajectory: 

τ = [ g1 ⊕ c1 ⊕ f1 ⊕ g2 ⊕ c2 ⊕ f2 ⊕ · · · ⊕ o] .

At each time step t, the model receives a reward 

rt. The objective is to maximize the expected cu-mulative reward over the trajectory. Let T denote the total number of time steps in an interaction trajectory. The first T − 1 steps correspond to tool-invocation turns, while the final step evaluates the correctness of the generated answer. Rewards are assigned based on two aspects: the executability of intermediate tool calls at each time step t and the correctness of the final answer o.4Through reinforcement learning, we enable the model to autonomously leverage tools to access and parse local context files, thereby developing the ability to perform complex long-context under-standing. The following sections detail how this paradigm is instantiated: we first describe the ar-chitectural components that realize tool-integrated reasoning, then outline the two-stage optimization process consisting of SFT cold-start initialization followed by RLVR fine-tuning. 

3.2 Customer Agent Framework Local Storage Mechanism Placing long texts di-rectly in the prompt leads to a noticeable degrada-tion in a model’s memory and reasoning ability (Du et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2024; Kuratov et al., 2024). Simply making the input “too long” can cause the model to fail to retain or effectively use all the in-formation. Moreover, when the model is required to perform tool-based operations such as retrieval or parsing on long texts, it often results in missing relevant information. In multi-turn settings, the time and computational cost introduced by long in-puts can further grow multiplicatively. To address this issue, we integrate the data loading and parsing tool into the sandbox environment, as illustrated in Figure 3. This tool allows the model to directly ac-cess datasets by their IDs, automatically parse the data according to predefined formats, and construct a database. In addition, it enables the model to retrieve key information using simple SQL queries. 

Interpreter Feedback Masking Tokens within 

<interpreter></interpreter> tags are not gen-erated by the policy and are therefore masked out from loss computation. This prevents external feedback tokens from degrading the coherence of model-generated reasoning. 

KV-Cache Reuse When code execution is trig-gered, we cache key-value (KV) states before ex-ecution and compute new KV states only for the interpreter feedback, reducing memory overhead. 

Asynchronous Sandbox We use sandboxed code execution to support safe and scalable multi-turn execution-driven training. The sandbox isolates model-generated code through strict system-access and resource constraints, which is especially im-portant in reinforcement learning settings with ex-ploratory code generation. By decoupling code ex-ecution from model inference, the sandbox enables parallel execution without blocking GPU computa-tion, substantially improving throughput and scala-bility for large-scale training and evaluation. 

3.3 SFT Data Construction 

Directly applying RL to models with no prior tool-use experience often results in prohibitive explo-ration costs, as the model struggles to generate well-formatted code snippets. Such frequent syn-tax errors can trap the agent in suboptimal cycles or execution deadlocks (Feng et al., 2025). Conse-quently, a more efficient strategy is to initiate a cold start via SFT training. This stage equips the model with a foundational understanding of tool-calling syntax, thereby establishing a robust starting policy for subsequent RLVR optimization. Building on the retrieval QA construction in Section 2.2, we generate multi-turn SFT data that includes explicit tool calls. Specifically, given the shopping trajectory in each QA example, we prompt a LLM to answer the corresponding ques-tion through multi-turn interactions with tools. We then filter the generated rollouts and retain only those that i) successfully execute all tool calls, and 

ii ) obtain the correct final answer from the tool outputs. The key idea is that by providing real, verifiable multi-turn tool-use rollouts, we enable the model to learn how to correctly invoke tools, interpret tool responses, and derive the final answer based on the returned response. 

3.4 Reinforcement Learning 

Drawing inspiration from the success of DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025), we adopt Group Rela-tive Policy Optimization (GRPO). For each ques-tion q drawn from the training question distribu-tion P (Q), GRPO samples a group of G outputs 

{o1, o 2, . . . , o G} from the old policy πθold and op-timizes the policy model πθ by maximizing:               

> JGRPO (θ) = Eq∼P(Q),{oi}Gi=1 ∼πθold (·| q)
> "
> 1
> G
> GX
> i=1
> 
> min
> 
> ri(θ)Ai,clip  ri(θ),1−ϵ, 1 + ϵAi
> 
> −β D KL (πθ(·| q)∥πref (·| q))
> #

(1) where ri(θ) = πθ(oi|q)/π θold (oi|q), and Ai =(Ri − mean( {Rj }Gj=1 )) /std( {Rj }Gj=1 ) is the nor-malized advantage of the i-th rollout in the current group, where Ri is the reward of rollout oi. ϵ is the clipping ratio and β controls the Kullback-Leibler (KL) regularization term DKL (·∥· ). The KL loss is added to prevent the policy from deviating exces-sively from the reference policy πref .5Rewards As described in Section 3.1, the reward consists of two components: i) the executability of intermediate code at first T − 1 step, and ii )the correctness of the final answer o. Specifically, to stabilize training and improve convergence, we adopt the reward function proposed in (Jiang et al., 2025), which combines answer correctness with tool usage. The correctness component evaluates the predicted answer against the ground truth in a strict format (e.g., within \boxed{} ). To encourage useful exploration, we provide an additional reward proportional to the number of executable tool calls. Formally, the reward is defined as             

> R(a, ˆa, T ) =
> (
> 1,if ˆa=a
> min( α, −1 + 0 .1·(T−1)) ,otherwise

where a and ˆa denote the ground-truth and pre-dicted answers in the strict format extracted from the final output o, respectively, and T − 1 denotes the number of executable tool-invocation turns. If the model fails to produce the correct answer, the reward reflects the quality of tool usage. When no executable tool calls are generated, the model re-ceives a reward of −1. Additional executable tool calls yield incremental rewards, encouraging mean-ingful tool interaction. However, to prevent the number of tool calls from dominating the reward signal, the reward is capped at a hyper parameter 

α. To avoid additional computational overhead, we use exact match to determine correctness. This designed reward reduces reward hacking, promotes diverse problem-solving strategies, and encourages the model to explore tool usage even when the final answer is incorrect. 

4 Experiments 

Datasets We evaluate our method on five datasets spanning mathematical reasoning, shopping behav-ioral reasoning, and multi-hop QA tasks: 

Mathematical Reasoning: We use AIME 2024 and AIME 2025, challenging mathematical competi-tion benchmarks requiring multi-step reasoning. 

Shopping Behavioral Reasoning: We evaluate on ShopTrajQA, our long-context dataset built from customer shopping trajectories. ShopTrajQA con-tains verifiable QA pairs in which answers can be retrieved from shopping trajectories using exe-cutable code command. We include two context-length variants: a short-context version with 32k tokens and a long-context version with 64k tokens. 

Multi-hop QA: To assess generalization to com-plex reasoning tasks, we evaluate on three multi-hop question answering benchmarks: 2WikiMulti-hopQA (Ho et al., 2020), HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018), and Bamboogle (Press et al., 2023). These datasets require models to integrate information from multiple sources to answer questions. Train-ing Data: It consists of the SFT data described in Section 3.3 and the RL data without tool-use traces. Appendix D reports details of these datasets. 

Baselines We apply our method to Qwen mod-els of different sizes, including Qwen3-1.7B 

and Qwen3-4B (Yang et al., 2025). To exam-ine whether larger models exhibit stronger tool-calling and question-answering capabilities, we also compare against three popular large-scale LLMs: gpt-oss-20B , Qwen3-Coder-30B , and 

gpt-oss-120B (OpenAI, 2025; Yang et al., 2025). 

Evaluation Metrics We evaluate the performance of the model using the following metrics. 

Accuracy: We quantify accuracy using pass@1, which reflects whether the model produces a cor-rect answer in its top-ranked generation. For AIME dataset, pass@1 is computed over 8 independent repetitions to reduce variance, and Exact Match is used to determine answer correctness. For Shop-TrajQA, considering the large scale of the dataset, we conduct a single evaluation run for efficiency. Due to the diversity of possible answers, we use an LLM-based judge to determine correctness; the evaluation prompt is provided in Appendix G.1. 

Multi-hop QA Metrics: For 2WikiMultihopQA, HotpotQA, and Bamboogle, we report both exact match (EM) and F1 scores, which are standard met-rics for evaluating question answering systems. 

Tool Usage Metrics: To measure tool-calling ca-pability, we define Tool Call Rate (TCR) as the proportion of instances where the model attempts to invoke at least one external tool during reasoning. The successful tool call rate (SuccTCR) measures the proportion of instances in which the model suc-cessfully executes at least one tool call. In our setting, essential contextual information must be retrieved via external tools. Therefore, both TCR and SuccTCR are monotonically beneficial: higher values indicate stronger awareness of tool neces-sity and more reliable tool execution, leading to more complete context acquisition and improved downstream reasoning. 

Implementation Our method is trained on eight NVIDIA H100 GPUs using Qwen3-1.7B and 

Qwen3-4B as the base models. Following the pro-6cedure described in Section 3.3, we collect an SFT dataset consisting of tool-use reasoning trajectories. We first apply SFT on this dataset as a cold start, enabling the model to learn when and how to in-voke a code interpreter for computation. We then perform RLVR training to further refine this capa-bility. In the following sections, we report results for both the SFT and RLVR versions of the models. The hyperparameter selection and their settings are described in Appendix B. 

4.1 Results and Analysis ShopTrajQA Performance We evaluate all mod-els on ShopTrajQA with 32k and 64k context set-tings. Table 1 presents the results. We first evaluate three large-scale models with 20B, 30B and 120B parameters. Each model supports two inference modes: i) pure text inference, where the entire shopping trajectory is included in the prompt, and 

ii ) tool-calling inference, where the model reads local shopping trajectory files, parses them and obtains answers via SQL execution. We find that the tool-calling mode consistently underperforms the pure text mode across these large models. One key reason is that the context files are store as local file, and relevant informa-tion can only be accessed through tool interactions. If the model fails to correctly invoke the required tools, it cannot retrieve the necessary information to produce the correct answer. As a result, the accuracy under the tool-calling mode reflects not only the correctness of the final answer but also the model’s ability to correctly use tools. Additionally, text parsing in the tool-calling setting is error-prone due to insufficient understanding of the underlying data format. These results highlight the importance of explicitly training models to use tools effectively in long-context understanding scenarios. We also provide representative case studies in Appendix F, showing that directly coding over the full trajectory context can cause parsing errors and that the model may also fail to correctly manage execution state across code blocks. Under the pure text inference mode, we observe that the 64k context setting is generally more chal-lenging than 32k, particularly for the 30B model, which shows a 13.7 point accuracy drop when the context length increases from 32k to 64k. To en-able models to learn correct reasoning through tool use, we conduct RLVR training on Qwen3-1.7B and Qwen3-4B. The results show substantial im-provements after RLVR training. Model 32k 64k                                                                                   

> Large-scale baseline models
> gpt-oss-20B (w/o tool) 22.3 ±0.7 21.4 ±0.8 gpt-oss-20B (w/ tool) 17.1 ±0.6 18.8 ±0.9 Qwen3-Coder-30B (w/o tool) 38.4 ±1.1 24.7 ±0.9 Qwen3-Coder-30B (w/ tool) 25.0 ±0.8 22.4 ±0.7 gpt-oss-120B (w/o tool) 62.6 ±1.2 57.2 ±1.0
> gpt-oss-120B (w/ tool) 28.7 ±0.9 35.5 ±1.3
> Our models (Qwen3-1.7B)
> Qwen3-1.7B (w/o tool) 23.0 ±0.6 –Qwen3-1.7B (w/ tool) 17.3 ±0.5 14.7 ±0.6 Qwen3-1.7B-SFT 28.1 ±0.7 27.7 ±0.8 Qwen3-1.7B-SFT-RLVR 59.2 ±1.1 51.0 ±1.0
> Our models (Qwen3-4B)
> Qwen3-4B (w/o tool) 48.0 ±1.0 47.6 ±1.1 Qwen3-4B (w/ tool) 13.8 ±0.4 9.3 ±0.5 Qwen3-4B-SFT 36.4 ±0.9 41.0 ±1.0 Qwen3-4B-SFT-RLVR 62.5 ±1.3 60.1 ±1.2

Table 1: Performance on ShopTrajQA under different context lengths. Results show accuracy (%). “–” indi-cates that the prompt token length exceeds the maximum context window. 

We observe that in the short-context setting (32k tokens), the Qwen3-1.7B model improves from 17 to 59 after RLVR, corresponding to a gain of 42 points, while the Qwen3-4B model improves from 13 to 62, corresponding to a gain of 49 points. Under the long-context setting (64k tokens), the Qwen3-1.7B model gains 36 points, and the Qwen3-4B model gains 51 points. These results show that our method achieves substantial improve-ments even in long-context scenarios, where pure text reasoning becomes more challenging. Tool usage helps alleviate this difficulty by enabling structured access to the trajectory data. 

Generalization Performance To assess whether training on shopping domain data causes overfit-ting, we evaluate our models on general mathemat-ical reasoning benchmarks (AIME 2024/2025) and multi-hop QA datasets (2WikiMultihopQA, Hot-potQA, Bamboogle). Table 2 presents the results. For mathematical reasoning, we observe no sub-stantial degradation on AIME 2024 or AIME 2025 after applying RLVR to our models. The Qwen3-1.7B model exhibits only a minor fluctuation of approximately one point. Interestingly, the Qwen3-4B model trained with RLVR achieves accuracy improvements of 3.75 points on AIME 2024 (from 62.08% to 65.83%) and 7.5 points on AIME 2025 (from 47.5% to 55%) relative to the baseline. These results indicate that our RLVR training not only pre-serves, but potentially improves, general reasoning capabilities. For multi-hop QA benchmarks, our RLVR-trained models maintain competitive per-formance compared to the baseline models. The 7Model AIME (%) 2wiki HotpotQA Bamboogle AIME24 AIME25 EM F1 EM F1 EM F1 Qwen3-1.7B 32.08 28.33 0.156 0.200 0.142 0.206 0.108 0.102 Qwen3-1.7B-SFT-RLVR 32.08 27.50 0.156 0.201 0.142 0.207 0.112 0.170                 

> Qwen3-4B 62.08 47.50 0.336 0.405 0.307 0.402 0.356 0.439 Qwen3-4B-SFT-RLVR 65.83 55.00 0.331 0.407 0.306 0.400 0.368 0.459

Table 2: Model performance comparison across AIME mathematics and Multi-hop QA benchmarks.                                   

> Model TCR SuccTCR
> 32k context
> Qwen3-1.7B (w/o tool) 0.00 0.00 Qwen3-1.7B (w/ tool) 0.76 0.42 Qwen3-1.7B-SFT 0.68 0.57 Qwen3-1.7B-SFT-RLVR 0.85 0.79
> Qwen3-4B (w/o tool) 0.00 0.00 Qwen3-4B (w/ tool) 0.86 0.79
> Qwen3-4B-SFT 0.79 0.77 Qwen3-4B-SFT-RLVR 0.95 0.69
> 64k context
> Qwen3-1.7B (w/o tool) 0.00 0.00 Qwen3-1.7B (w/ tool) 0.74 0.44 Qwen3-1.7B-SFT 0.69 0.61 Qwen3-1.7B-SFT-RLVR 0.77 0.73
> Qwen3-4B (w/o tool) 0.00 0.00 Qwen3-4B (w/ tool) 0.77 0.73 Qwen3-4B-SFT 0.84 0.81
> Qwen3-4B-SFT-RLVR 0.93 0.66

Table 3: Tool-calling statistics on ShopTrajQA under 32k and 64k contexts. TCR denotes the proportion of in-stances where a tool call is attempted; SuccTCR denotes the proportion where tool calls execute successfully. 

Qwen3-4B-SFT-RLVR model achieves the best F1 scores on all three multi-hop QA datasets, demon-strating strong generalization to complex reasoning tasks that require integrating information from mul-tiple sources. Overall, these results demonstrate that our approach does not suffer from domain over-fitting and successfully generalizes across diverse reasoning tasks. 

Tool Calling Capability To assess the model’s tool-calling capability, we evaluate the tool call rate (TCR) and successful tool call rate (SuccTCR), as described in Section 4. We expect both metrics to approach 100% for optimal performance. Table 3 presents tool-calling statistics on ShopTrajQA for both 32k and 64k contexts. For both context lengths, our RLVR-trained models achieve a higher TCR compared to base-line models, indicating greater awareness of when tool use is necessary. The Qwen3-4B-SFT-RLVR model achieves TCR of 0.95 and 0.93 for 32k and 64k contexts, respectively, demonstrating that the model learns to invoke tools in nearly all in-stances. SuccTCR also improves substantially after RLVR training, confirming that the model learns not only when to call the tools but also how to in-voke them correctly. The Qwen3-4B trained with RLVR shows a slightly lower SuccTCR compared to its SFT counterpart. This is likely because RL training encourages more frequent tool calls, lead-ing to a larger number of attempts and consequently a higher probability of execution errors. 

Data quality evaluation Additional analyses on data quality and training-data effectiveness are provided in Appendix E. We sample trajectories from OPeRA and ShopTrajQA to form pairwise comparisons and ask GPT-4.1 to judge which is more likely generated from real human behavior; 

GPT-4.1 prefers ShopTrajQA in 73 out of 100 cases. We also compare RLVR training using ShopTrajQA against other tool-use datasets, includ-ing the SFT and RL data from DAPO-Math-17k (Yu et al., 2026); models trained on ShopTrajQA achieve consistently better performance on Shop-TrajQA tasks. 

5 Discussion 

In this work, we introduce ShopTrajQA, a long-context benchmark designed to evaluate reasoning over realistic shopping trajectories. Through ex-tensive experiments, we show that existing LLMs struggle to effectively process long behavioral his-tories when the entire trajectory is directly included in the prompt. To address this challenge, we pro-pose a Customer Agent Framework that external-izes long trajectories as structured files and enables models to interact with them through tool usage. Combined with RLVR training on verifiable tool-use trajectories, the framework allows models to retrieve, parse, and reason over long behavioral sequences more effectively. Experimental results demonstrate that this approach substantially im-proves reasoning accuracy, particularly under long-context settings. These findings suggest that inte-grating tool-assisted reasoning is a promising di-rection for enabling LLMs to operate on complex, long-horizon interaction data. 8Limitations 

Although ShopTrajQA is grounded in real-world product information, the shopping trajectories are generated through LLM-based simulation. As a result, the behavioral patterns may not fully cap-ture the diversity and complexity of real user inter-actions in large-scale e-commerce platforms. Fu-ture work could incorporate real-world anonymized interaction logs or hybrid simulation frameworks to further improve behavioral realism and diver-sity. The computational cost of multi-round tool interactions and reinforcement learning remains high, especially for large models and long-context scenarios, which may limit scalability. Although our framework alleviates issues related to context length, extremely long inputs beyond the 64k-token threshold evaluated in our experiments may still pose challenges. In addition, our current frame-work mainly assumes structured data that can be retrieved through SQL-style queries. Extending the approach to handle unstructured data sources, such as free-form documents, remains an important direction for future work. 

References 

Anthropic. 2025. Claude haiku 4.5. Mingyang Chen, Linzhuang Sun, Tianpeng Li, Haoze Sun, Chenzheng Zhu, Haofen Wang, Jeff Pan, Wen Zhang, Huajun Chen, Fan Yang, et al. 2026. Learn-ing to reason with search for llms via reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 38:85287–85307. Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W Cohen. 2022. Program of thoughts prompting: Disentangling computation from reason-ing for numerical reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12588 .Yufeng Du, Minyang Tian, Srikanth Ronanki, Subendhu Rongali, Sravan Bodapati, Aram Galstyan, Azton Wells, Roy Schwartz, Eliu A Huerta, and Hao Peng. 2025. Context length alone hurts llm per-formance despite perfect retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.05381 .Jiazhan Feng, Shijue Huang, Xingwei Qu, Ge Zhang, Yujia Qin, Baoquan Zhong, Chengquan Jiang, Jinxin Chi, and Wanjun Zhong. 2025. Retool: Reinforce-ment learning for strategic tool use in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.11536 .Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. 2025. Deepseek-r1 in-centivizes reasoning in llms through reinforcement learning. Nature , 645(8081):633–638. Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasu-pat, and Mingwei Chang. 2020. Retrieval augmented language model pre-training. In International confer-ence on machine learning , pages 3929–3938. PMLR. Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. 2020. Constructing a multi-hop qa dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. In Proceedings of the 28th International Con-ference on Computational Linguistics , pages 6609– 6625. Hongru Ji, Yuyin Fan, Meng Zhao, Xianghua Li, Lian-wei Wu, and Chao Gao. 2026. Stride-ed: A strategy-grounded stepwise reasoning framework for empa-thetic dialogue systems. Preprint , arXiv:2604.07100. Dongfu Jiang, Yi Lu, Zhuofeng Li, Zhiheng Lyu, Ping Nie, Haozhe Wang, Alex Su, Hui Chen, Kai Zou, Chao Du, et al. 2025. Verltool: Towards holistic agentic reinforcement learning with tool use. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.01055 .Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and Jiawei Han. 2025. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.09516 .Yuri Kuratov, Aydar Bulatov, Petr Anokhin, Ivan Rod-kin, Dmitry Sorokin, Artyom Sorokin, and Mikhail Burtsev. 2024. Babilong: Testing the limits of llms with long context reasoning-in-a-haystack. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,37:106519–106554. Tian Lan, Jiang Li, Yemin Wang, Xu Liu, Xiangdong Su, and Guanglai Gao. 2025a. F 2bench: An open-ended fairness evaluation benchmark for llms with factuality considerations. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 2031–2046. Tian Lan, Xiangdong Su, Xu Liu, Ruirui Wang, Ke Chang, Jiang Li, and Guanglai Gao. 2025b. Mcbe: A multi-task chinese bias evaluation benchmark for large language models. In Findings of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 6033–6056. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, et al. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in neu-ral information processing systems , 33:9459–9474. Chengpeng Li, Zhengyang Tang, Ziniu Li, Mingfeng Xue, Keqin Bao, Tian Ding, Ruoyu Sun, Benyou Wang, Xiang Wang, Junyang Lin, et al. 2025. Cort: Code-integrated reasoning within thinking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09820 .Jiang Li, Tian Lan, Shanshan Wang, Dongxing Zhang, Dianqing Lin, Guanglai Gao, Derek F Wong, and 

9Xiangdong Su. 2026a. Who wrote this line? evaluat-ing the detection of llm-generated classical chinese poetry. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.10101 .Yu Li, Rui Miao, Zhengling Qi, and Tian Lan. 2026b. Arise: Agent reasoning with intrinsic skill evolu-tion in hierarchical reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.16060 .Yu Li, Sizhe Tang, and Tian Lan. 2026c. Reason in chains, learn in trees: Self-rectification and graft-ing for multi-turn agent policy optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.07165 .Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paran-jape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024. Lost in the middle: How language mod-els use long contexts. Transactions of the association for computational linguistics , 12:157–173. Guanran Luo, Zhongquan Jian, Wentao Qiu, Meihong Wang, and Qingqiang Wu. 2025. DTCRS: Dynamic tree construction for recursive summarization. In 

Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10948–10963, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Guanran Luo, Wentao Qiu, Zhongquan Jian, Meihong Wang, and Qingqiang Wu. 2026. Gcot-decoding: Un-locking deep reasoning paths for universal question answering. Preprint , arXiv:2604.06794. OpenAI. 2025. Introducing gpt-oss. Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. 2022. Training language models to follow instruc-tions with human feedback. Advances in neural in-formation processing systems , 35:27730–27744. Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. 2023. Measuring and narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. In Findings of the Association for Computa-tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 5687–5711. Wentao Qiu, Haotian Hu, Fanyi Wang, Jinwei Kong, and Yu Zhang. 2026a. Dimmem: Dimensional structur-ing for efficient long-term agent memory. Preprint ,arXiv:2605.15759. Wentao Qiu, Guanran Luo, Zhongquan Jian, Jingqi Gao, Meihong Wang, and Qingqiang Wu. 2026b. Anchor: Abductive network construction with hierarchical or-chestration for reliable probability inference in large language models. Preprint , arXiv:2605.10328. Chandan K Reddy, Lluís Màrquez, Fran Valero, Nikhil Rao, Hugo Zaragoza, Sambaran Bandyopadhyay, Arnab Biswas, Anlu Xing, and Karthik Subbian. 2022. Shopping queries dataset: A large-scale esci benchmark for improving product search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.06588 .Chengbing Wang, Yang Zhang, Wenjie Wang, Xiaoyan Zhao, Fuli Feng, Xiangnan He, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2025a. Think-while-generating: On-the-fly reason-ing for personalized long-form generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.06690 .Hongru Wang, Yujia Qin, Yankai Lin, Jeff Z Pan, and Kam-Fai Wong. 2024. Empowering large language models: Tool learning for real-world interaction. In 

Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Infor-mation Retrieval , pages 2983–2986. Siyuan Wang, Gaokai Zhang, Li Lyna Zhang, Ning Shang, Fan Yang, Dongyao Chen, and Mao Yang. 2025b. Loongrl: Reinforcement learning for ad-vanced reasoning over long contexts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.19363 .Zi-Han Wang, Lam Nguyen, Zhengyang Zhao, Mengyue Yang, Chengwei Qin, Yujiu Yang, and Linyi Yang. 2026. Creativebench: Benchmarking and enhancing machine creativity via self-evolving challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.11863 .Ziyi Wang, Yuxuan Lu, Wenbo Li, Amirali Amini, Bo Sun, Yakov Bart, Weimin Lyu, Jiri Gesi, Tian Wang, Jing Huang, et al. 2025c. Opera: A dataset of observation, persona, rationale, and action for evalu-ating llms on human online shopping behavior simu-lation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05606 .Ziyi Wang, Yuxuan Lu, Yimeng Zhang, Jing Huang, and Dakuo Wang. 2025d. Customer-r1: Person-alized simulation of human behaviors via rl-based llm agent in online shopping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.07230 .Can Xie, Ruotong Pan, Xiangyu Wu, Yunfei Zhang, Jiayi Fu, Tingting Gao, and Guorui Zhou. 2025. Un-locking exploration in rlvr: Uncertainty-aware advan-tage shaping for deeper reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.10649 .Shijia Xu, Zhou Wu, Xiaolong Jia, Yu Wang, Kai Liu, and April Xiaowen Dong. 2026. Self-correcting rag: Enhancing faithfulness via mmkp context selection and nli-guided mcts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.10734 .An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christo-pher D Manning. 2018. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 conference on empiri-cal methods in natural language processing , pages 2369–2380. Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian Fan, Gaohong Liu, Lingjun Liu, et al. 2026. Dapo: An 

10 open-source llm reinforcement learning system at scale. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38:113222–113244. Xinglang Zhang, Yunyao Zhang, ZeLiang Chen, Jun-qing Yu, Wei Yang, and Zikai Song. 2026a. Logical phase transitions: Understanding collapse in llm log-ical reasoning. Preprint , arXiv:2601.02902. Yimeng Zhang, Tian Wang, Jiri Gesi, Ziyi Wang, Yux-uan Lu, Jiacheng Lin, Sinong Zhan, Vianne Gao, Ruochen Jiao, Junze Liu, et al. 2025. Shop-r1: Re-warding llms to simulate human behavior in online shopping via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.17842 .Yunyao Zhang, Yihao Ai, Zuocheng Ying, Qirui Mi, Junqing Yu, Wei Yang, and Zikai Song. 2026b. Coupling macro dynamics and micro states for long-horizon social simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.05516 .Yunyao Zhang, Xinglang Zhang, Junxi Sheng, Wen-bing Li, Junqing Yu, Yi-Ping Phoebe Chen, Wei Yang, and Zikai Song. 2026c. Semantic-aware log-ical reasoning via a semiotic framework. Preprint ,arXiv:2509.24765. 

11 A Related Work 

Reasoning has become increasingly important for improving the capabilities of large language models (LLMs), particularly on complex and knowledge-intensive tasks (Wang et al., 2025a; Qiu et al., 2026b; Ji et al., 2026; Luo et al., 2026). Tool-integrated reasoning further provides an effective paradigm for enhancing LLMs by enabling ac-cess to external knowledge sources and compu-tational tools. Early approaches such as Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020; Guu et al., 2020) retrieve relevant documents from external knowledge bases to improve factual grounding, while later retrieval-based frameworks have shown strong performance on knowledge-intensive tasks (Luo et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2026). However, these methods typically rely on retriev-ing relevant context before inference, providing the model with information to reason over in a single pass. Recent work shows that allowing models to interact with tools iteratively during reasoning can improve problem solving, as multi-step tool interactions enable models to dynamically retrieve missing information and refine intermediate steps (Jin et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2026; Qiu et al., 2026a; Li et al., 2026b). Reinforcement Learning with Ver-ifiable Rewards (RLVR) has further been used to train models to perform such multi-turn tool inter-actions. Beyond retrieval-based question answering, tool-integrated reasoning has also been applied to math-ematically and computationally demanding tasks by incorporating programmatic reasoning and ex-ternal execution (Chen et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2026a,b,c). Subsequent work studies when tools should be invoked and how in-vocation strategies affect performance (Feng et al., 2025; Li et al., 2026c). However, learning effec-tive tool use remains challenging due to execution errors and malformed tool calls. Li et al. (2025) shows that structured tool invocation can improve both tool-use efficiency and reasoning reliability. Wang et al. (2025b) explore the use of rein-forcement learning to enhance long-context rea-soning by constructing ultra-long training data that encourages models to reason over extended tex-tual inputs. While this approach improves the model’s ability to process longer sequences, it re-lies on the model’s native context window, and therefore remains fundamentally constrained by the fixed context-length limitation of the underly-ing LLM. Reinforcement learning has also been explored in shopping-related tasks. For example, Shop-R1 (Zhang et al., 2025) focuses on modeling shopping behaviors through reinforcement learn-ing, such as simulating online shopping decision-making. Customer-R1 (Wang et al., 2025d) further explores incorporating customer personas to sim-ulate shopping behavior. However, these studies primarily focus on behavior simulation rather than reasoning over long-term interaction histories. In particular, RLVR-based tool-interactive reasoning for extracting answers from long and structured shopping trajectories remains largely unexplored. Evaluating the outputs of LLMs is critical for their effective use (Lan et al., 2025a,b; Li et al., 2026a; Wang et al., 2026). OPeRA (Wang et al., 2025c) introduces a public shopping-trajectory benchmark, but its trajectories are relatively short and mainly centered around student users. To address this gap, we introduce ShopTrajQA, a long-context evaluation benchmark constructed from real-world product information and simulated shopping trajectories. We further propose a Cus-tomer Agent Framework that interacts with exter-nalized local files to overcome context-length limi-tations and enable multi-step reasoning over com-plex shopping histories. 

B Model Hyperparameters 

Table 4 and Table 5 summarize the hyperparame-ter configurations used for supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and reinforcement learning (RL) training, respectively.                 

> Category Setting
> Optimizer AdamW Training epochs 4
> Training batch size 32
> Micro-batch size / GPU 4
> Max sequence length 16384
> Multi-turn training Enabled Message field messages
> Tool specification field tools
> Parallel strategy FSDP Sequence parallel size 4
> Padding removal Enabled Checkpoint save frequency 20 steps GPUs 8
> Nodes 1

Table 4: SFT model hyperparameters. 

C ShopTrajQA Benchmark Details 

ShopTrajQA is constructed to evaluate models on long-context understanding over shopping trajecto-ries. Each example in the benchmark consists of: 12 Category Setting 

Advantage estimator GRPO KL in reward Disabled KL coefficient 0.0

Optimizer learning rate 1 × 10 −6

Training epochs 15 

Training batch size 32 

Max prompt length 2048 

Max response length 4096 

Max model length 6144 

Overlong prompt filtering Enabled PPO mini-batch size 32 

PPO micro-batch size / GPU 8

Clip ratio ϵ (low, high) (0 .2, 0.28) 

Clip constant 10 .0

Loss function α -0.6 Rollout engine vLLM (async) Tensor parallel size 1

Rollouts per prompt 8

Multi-turn rollout Enabled Max user / assistant turns 16 /16 

Validation sampling Top-p = 0 .6, Temp.=1.0 GPUs 8

Nodes 1

T maximum 10 

Table 5: RL Training model hyperparameters. 

(i) a simulated shopping trajectory, (ii) a retrieval-verifiable question, (iii) an executable query (SQL, regex, or other programmatic command), and (iv) the verified answer. 

C.1 Example Question-Answer Pairs 

The table below illustrates representative examples from ShopTrajQA:                       

> Shopping Trajectory Snippet Question Code Command Answer
> User bought “iPhone 13”, “AirPods Pro”, and “Mac-Book Pro” over 3 months Which product did the user buy most recently?
> SELECT product_name FROM purchases ORDER BY date DESC LIMIT 1;
> MacBook Pro User browsed “Nike shoes”, “Adidas shoes”, “Puma shoes” List all brands the user has purchased shoes from
> SELECT DISTINCT brand FROM purchases WHERE category=’shoes’;
> Nike, Adidas, Puma User purchased electron-ics worth >$1000 in the last month What is the total spending on elec-tronics last month?
> SELECT SUM(price) FROM purchases WHERE category=’electronics’ AND date >’2026-02-01’;
> $2500

Table 6: Representative QA examples in ShopTrajQA. Each question is paired with an executable command and verified answer. 

C.2 Factuality and Verification 

To ensure the reliability of the benchmark, we adopt the following procedures: • Executable Verification: Each question in-cludes a programmatic command that retrieves the answer from the underlying trajectory. Com-mands are automatically executed to confirm they run correctly and return the expected result. • LLM-Assisted Factuality: The dataset con-struction leverages LLMs to generate trajectories and questions. We quantify factual correctness by comparing generated answers against the tra-jectory. • Multi-Level Validation: Commands that fail to execute or produce inconsistent answers are fil-tered out, ensuring only high-quality, verifiable QA pairs are included. 

C.3 Dataset Variants 

ShopTrajQA provides multiple variants to evaluate long-context understanding: • 32k-token Trajectories: Truncated version for medium-length context evaluation. • 64k-token Trajectories: Full-length trajec-tories, challenging models on extreme long-context understanding. This benchmark supports quantifying model per-formance in terms of retrieval accuracy, factual correctness, and long-context understanding. 

C.4 Data Distribution 

Figure 4: Number of action distribution for 32k and 64k setting. 

Figure 5: Token length distribution plot for 32k and 64k setting. 

D Dataset Summary 

Table 7 provides the details about the training and evaluation datasets. The shopping trajectories in ShopTrajQA (32k) are obtained by truncating the 13 Figure 6: action token scatter for 32k and 64k setting. 

trajectories from the ShopTrajQA (64k) version. However, the retrieval QA pairs described in Sec-tion 2.2 are constructed separately. Since our data construction pipeline is easy to scale, we generate additional training data with questions that are dif-ferent from those in the evaluation set. We then prompt a LLM ( Qwen3-Coder-30B ) to produce ref-erence rollout (tool use trace) that (i) successfully execute all tool calls and (ii) obtain the correct fi-nal answer from the tool outputs. Compared with ShopTrajQA SFT, ShopTrajQA RL does not re-quire predefined reference rollouts, as the model can discover correct rollouts through exploration during RL training. Dataset Size Area                   

> Training dataset
> ShopTrajQA SFT 228 Shopping ShopTrajQA RL 1100 Shopping
> Evaluation dataset
> ShopTrajQA (32k) 100 Shopping ShopTrajQA (64k) 100 Shopping AIME 2024 30 Mathematics AIME 2025, 30 Mathematics 2WikiMultihopQA 12576 Multi-hop QA HotpotQA 7405 Multi-hop QA Bamboogle 125 Multi-hop QA

Table 7: Dataset summary. 

Data Generation and Usage Statement. We use Claude Haiku 4.5 (Anthropic, 2025) to generate synthetic shopping trajectories that simulate user in-teraction environments. These trajectories provide contextual inputs for constructing our dataset. The supervision signals, including reference answers and tool interaction traces used for supervised fine-tuning (SFT), are generated by Qwen3-Coder-30B 

(Yang et al., 2025). Claude-generated trajectories are not used as supervision signals. All generated data are used solely for research and benchmarking purposes. 

E Data Quality Evaluation 

Experiment 1: Pairwise Trajectory Realism Evaluation with GPT-4.1 

We randomly sample trajectories from OPeRA and ShopTrajQA and construct 100 pairwise ex-amples. In each pair, one trajectory is sampled from OPeRA and the other from ShopTrajQA. We store the source label for each trajectory as ground truth. For each pair, we ask GPT-4.1 to answer a multiple-choice question: 

> • The first trajectory is more like human-written. • The second trajectory is more like human-written. • Cannot distinguish.

The prompt template is shown below. Quality Evaluation Prompt You are evaluating the shopping behavior trajectories. Decide which trajectory is more likely writ-ten/generated from real human behavior. Be conservative and avoid overconfident guesses. Return exactly one option token on the first line: FIRST, SECOND, or CAN-NOT_DISTINGUISH. Then on the second line, provide a short reason (<=40 words). Trajectory FIRST: first_text Trajectory SECOND: second_text We then compare GPT-4.1 choices with the stored source labels. As shown in Table 8, GPT-4.1 selects the ShopTrajQA trajectory in 73 out of 100 cases, indicating that ShopTrajQA trajectories are generally judged as more human-like than OPeRA trajectories.      

> OPeRA ShopTrajQA Cannot distinguish #Case 973 18

Table 8: Pairwise trajectory realism evaluation (100 pairs) using GPT-4.1. 

Experiment 2: Training Data Comparison 

To further evaluate training-data effectiveness, we train the same models with two different data sources: DAPO-Math-17k (Yu et al., 2026) and ShopTrajQA. Table 9 shows that models trained with ShopTrajQA consistently outperform those 14 trained with DAPO-Math-17k on ShopTrajQA eval-uation, indicating stronger transfer to shopping-domain long-context understanding.           

> Model 32k 64k Qwen3-1.7B-SFT-RLVR (DAPO-Math-17k) 15 9Qwen3-1.7B-SFT-RLVR (ShopTrajQA) 59 51
> Qwen3-4B-SFT-RLVR (DAPO-Math-17k) 25 17 Qwen3-4B-SFT-RLVR (ShopTrajQA) 62 60
> Table 9: Training-data comparison on ShopTrajQA eval-uation (accuracy, %).

F Additional Case Studies on Tool Use Failures 

This section presents two representative failure cases from Qwen3-Coder-30B . These cases illus-trate why directly asking the model to write code over ultra-long shopping trajectories is error-prone, and why our tool design saves the trajectory as a local file and provides predefined utility functions and usage instructions. 

F.1 Case Study 1: Long-Context Code Generation Failure 

A straightforward approach is to place the entire shopping trajectory directly in the prompt and ask the model to write code to parse and analyze it. However, we found that this setup often leads to errors. One representative example is shown below. Case Study 1 <code> python history = """ [... Put all the shopping trajec-tory in the code ...] """ lines = history.strip().split(’\’) first_search = None for line in lines: if "type [Search Amazon |" in line: first_search = line break first_search_index = lines.index ( first _search) click_count = 0 for i in range(first_search_index): if "click [asin |" in lines[i]: click_count += 1 print(click_count) “ </code> <interpreter> ValueError: None is not in list </interpreter> This case reveals several issues with directly em-bedding the full trajectory into the prompt and ask-ing the model to code from scratch: • Context omission risk. When the model gener-ates code that includes ultra-long context, parts of the trajectory may be omitted, truncated, or reformatted incorrectly. • Degraded coding reliability under long con-text. The model must simultaneously preserve the raw context, understand the task, and write executable parsing logic. This increases the chance of implementation errors, as shown in Case 1. • High tool-use complexity. The model is re-quired to complete multiple steps at once: read-ing the trajectory, parsing the text, retrieving the relevant event, and writing correct code. This makes tool calling unnecessarily difficult. This observation directly motivates our approach. Instead of asking the model to reconstruct the full context inside the generated code, we store the trajectory as a local file and provide predefined utility functions and tool-use instructions. This design reduces the burden of long-context handling and allows the model to focus on the reasoning step rather than low-level parsing. Notably, in Table 1, all settings with tool use are based on this design choice: the trajectory is saved locally, and the model is given explicit instructions and examples for using the provided tools. 

F.2 Case Study 2: Failure to Maintain Execution State Across Code Blocks 

Another issue arises even when the trajectory has already been wrapped into a local loading utility. In the following example, the model correctly loads the trajectory in one code block. This case highlights a different failure mode: the model does not reliably account for execution-state boundaries across code blocks. In practice, the model may assume that previously defined vari-ables remain available, while the actual execution environment requires the data to be reloaded in each new code block. This issue suggests that successful tool use re-quires not only access to the right functions, but also awareness of execution state management. Without explicit guidance, the model may fail to reload the data before analysis, leading to avoidable errors such as NameError .15 Case Study 2 

<code> python from data_loader import load_trajectory conn, df = load_trajectory(’3’) df.head() </code> <interpreter> Data preview: row_id timestamp ... search_query 0 2024-05-01 08:15:32 ... kids hair acces-sories 1 2024-05-01 09:22:18 ... toddler head-bands 2 2024-05-01 10:05:44 ... little girl head-bands ages 2-6 3 2024-05-01 10:18:27 ... 4 2024-05-01 10:22:15 ... power rangers dvd [5 rows x 10 columns] Columns: Index([’row_id’, ’timestamp’, ’ac-tion_type’, ’asin’, ’product_name’, ’brand’, ’color’, ’product_types’, ’price’, ’search_query’], dtype=’object’) </interpreter> <code> df.columns </code> <interpreter> NameError: name ’df’ is not defined </interpreter> 

Our approach mitigates this issue by using RLVR training to encourage reloading the trajec-tory whenever a new execution block begins 

G Prompt for LLM 

G.1 Prompt for LLM judge G.2 Prompt for Shopping Trajectory Simulation 

LLM Judge Prompt 

You are an expert evaluator. Your task is to determine if a model’s answer is factu-ally correct for a given question. 

Question: question Expected Answer: reference_answer Model Answer: model_response - Compare the Model Answer with the Ex-pected Answer. - Minor differences in word-ing, formatting, or numeric representation are acceptable if the factual meaning is pre-served. - Product names (reasonably close brand/product names) are acceptable. - Answer format flexibility: If the question asks for a product but the model gives the price, that’s still correct if the price matches the expected product. - If the Model Answer conveys the correct factual information (semantic equivalence), mark as CORRECT. - If the Model Answer is factually incor-rect, contradicts the Expected Answer, or contains only placeholders (e.g., "PLACEHOLDER_FOR_ANSWER", "{{final_answer}}"), "None", or indicates no useful information (e.g., "No search event found"), mark as INCORRECT. - Do NOT assume, invent, or speculate about missing information. Only evaluate the ac-tual content provided in the Model Answer. - Output ONLY one JSON object on the final line, and nothing else: {{"answer": "CORRECT"}} or {{"answer": "INCOR-RECT"}}. 

16 Shopping Trajectory Simulation Prompt 

Given the input query data {query}, simulate a one month shopping trajectory for a single user. Generate a shopping trajectory containing approximately: search: 54.48%, click: 35.31%, add to Cart: 7.31%, purchase: 2.90%. To ensure the global distribution is respected, the trajectory MUST enforce the following rule. For every block of 100 actions: - 55 search - 35 click - 7 add to Cart - 3 purchase actions. These block-level ratios must be preserved across the entire trajectory to guarantee that - search : click = 55 : 35 ≈ 1.5 : 1 - add to Cart : purchase = 7 : 3 ≈ 2 : 1. Example timestamp format: 2024-05-01 19:30:25. There are four possible action types: search, click, add to Cart, and purchase. Each action must follow the exact formats below, with each action separated by a newline (\n): search: time-stamp search [Search Amazon | {query_text}]. click: time-stamp click [{product_id} | {product_title}] (brand: {product_brand}, color: {prod-uct_color}, price: {simulated_price}). add to Cart: time-stamp add to Cart [{product_id} | {product_title}] (brand: {product_brand}, color: {product_color}, price: {simulated_price}). purchase: time-stamp purchase [{product_id} | {product_title}] (brand: {product_brand}, color: {product_color}, price: {simulated_price}). Each action begins with a timestamp and must satisfy the following constraints: - add to Cart must always appear after a click on the same product. - Purchase must always appear after its corresponding add to Cart on the same product. - Before the user reaches the final accurate query {search}, simulate several exploratory searches (2 search actions) related to the underlying shopping intention. Timestamps: - Must be chronologically increasing - Spread naturally over May 2024. Output format: {“shopping_trajectory”: “action1\naction2\naction3\n...”} Query: query 

17