Title: VADAOrchestra: Neurosymbolic Orchestration of Adaptive Reasoning Workflows

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22485v2

Published Time: Thu, 25 Jun 2026 00:42:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# VADAOrchestra: Neurosymbolic Orchestration of Adaptive Reasoning Workflows 

## Teodoro Baldazzi 1 , Luigi Bellomarini 2 , Andrea Coletta 2 , Michela Iezzi 2

## Carsten Maple 3 , Alessandro Pesare 1 , Emanuel Sallinger 11TU Wien 

> 2

## Banca d’Italia 

> 3

## University of Warwick {teodoro.baldazzi, alessandro.pesare, emanuel.sallinger}@tuwien.ac.at, {luigi.bellomarini, andrea.coletta, michela.iezzi}@bancaditalia.it, CM@warwick.ac.uk 

Abstract 

Decision-making in real-world settings rarely follows a fixed script. Instead, it unfolds as a dynamic reasoning process in which the appropriate course of action evolves as new con-text and data become available. Traditional Business Pro-cess Management systems provide rigor, determinism, and auditability, yet they generally struggle to adapt their ex-ecution at runtime. Conversely, agentic systems based on Large Language Models (LLMs) bring flexibility to decision-making, but they are inherently opaque, often unreliable, and suffer from significant scalability constraints when operat-ing over large datasets. To combine these complementary paradigms, we introduce VADAOrchestra, a neurosymbolic framework that models complex workflows as evolving rea-soning processes. The framework adopts a hybrid approach: given a user query and a collection of data sources, an LLM-based orchestrator incrementally plans and adapts the work-flow. This is encoded as a logic program in a fragment of Datalog+/- where predicates correspond to tool invocations and rules represent both predefined domain dependencies and logic constructs synthesized on demand to manipulate inter-mediate results. All logical inference tasks are then executed by a state-of-the-art Datalog+/- symbolic engine. This ap-proach provides a verifiable reasoning trace, supporting the auditability and reproducibility of the entire process. Fur-thermore, by decoupling high-level orchestration from sym-bolic inference, it addresses scalability concerns, enabling complex reasoning over large datasets through targeted data querying. We evaluate VADAOrchestra on real-world finan-cial use cases, demonstrating faithfulness, scalability, and ex-plainability compared to standard agentic architectures. 

## 1 Introduction 

Real-world decision-making processes, particularly in com-plex domains such as finance, cannot be reduced to static, predefined workflows. In these knowledge-intensive set-tings, a workflow is not merely a sequence of tasks, but a dynamic process in which the appropriate course of ac-tion depends on newly available information, contextual fac-tors, and intermediate outcomes. The central challenge in automating such workflows arises from their dual nature: they are partially structured, following well-defined proce-dures derived from domain expertise, and partially dynamic, branching unpredictably based on runtime findings. Historically, Business Process Management (BPM) sys-tems have provided the essential rigor, transparency, and compliance guarantees required for highly structured enter-prise workflows. However, their largely static nature proves to be a major limitation, as these frameworks struggle to ac-commodate the data-driven branching that characterizes dy-namic workflows (Di Ciccio, Marrella, and Russo 2015). More recently, agentic AI has emerged as a founda-tional paradigm for automating knowledge-intensive work-flows (Wei et al. 2026). Leveraging Large Language Mod-els (LLMs), agentic systems exhibit strong capabilities in context-aware decision-making, planning, and tool orches-tration (Shinn et al. 2023; Patil et al. 2024). LLMs can in-terpret high-level goals, decompose them into sub-tasks, and interact with external resources such as web search engines, databases, and software tools. Standardized protocols, such as the Model Context Protocol (MCP), further facilitate this interaction by exposing tools through a uniform interface, enabling LLMs to select and compose tool invocations dy-namically at runtime (Anthropic 2024). Despite their capabilities, LLM-based systems still face a fundamental limitation in explainability. Research on faithfulness has shown that LLMs frequently generate post-hoc explanations that do not reflect their actual reasoning paths (Lanham et al. 2023; Turpin et al. 2023; Tanneru et al. 2024; Matton et al. 2025). 

A Central Bank dynamic workflow. As an illustrative case, consider the following scenario from a central bank in Europe, regarding the assessment of a bank’s “concentration risk”. This activity requires the analyst to identify large ex-posures (i.e., significant amounts of money lent or commit-ted to individual counterparties) and determine whether any exceed regulatory limits, thereby preventing excessive risk from a single entity. As illustrated in Figure 1, even a rel-atively contained case involves multiple counterparties, het-erogeneous credit instruments (loans and credit lines), and layered ownership structures. Indeed, realistic deployments scale this complexity to thousands of entities. Rather than a static compliance check, this assessment is a dynamic in-vestigation. While the components of an exposure, such as loans and credit lines, are defined by domain knowledge, the decision-making process must unfold adaptively based on runtime findings. If a single counterparty directly exceeds the regulatory threshold, a breach is identified and the anal-ysis can terminate immediately. However, if no individual breach is detected, the reasoning shifts toward a more com-          

> arXiv:2606.22485v2 [cs.AI] 24 Jun 2026 14.375 %
> 30.75 %
> Loan
> Credit Line
> Loan
> .
> .
> .
> .
> Loan
> NeuralLinker SpA
> Alpha Corp
> .
> .
> .
> .
> Loan
> Credit Line
> Credit Line
> Ultimate
> Controller
> Ultimate
> Controller
> Synthetix
> Global Fund
> Bank Gamma
> 16.375 %
> Tool
> Discovery
> and
> Selection
> Plan
> Execution
> Dependency
> Aware
> Planning
> Query Answer
> Reasoner
> Replanning
> VADAORCHESTRA FINANCIAL USE-CASE
> Loan
> Credit Line
> DeepLogic Ltd
> "What are Bank Gamma's
> largest exposures, and do
> any of them pose
> concentration risk concerns?"
> Major exposures found:
> DeepLogic Ltd ( 16.375% ),
> NeuralLinker SpA ( 14.375% )
> Aggregated entities:
> Synthetix Global Fund controls
> NeuralLinker SpA and DeepLogic Ltd
> Concentration risk:
> Combined exposure of $24.6M, 30.75%
> of bank's capital, which exceeds the 25%
> regulatory threshold.
> 🔗 full execution audit available.
> Data
> Manipulation

Figure 1: The V ADA ORCHESTRA framework, with the system architecture (left), and a real financial use case (right). The example shows a concentration-risk assessment for Bank Gamma under a 25% capital threshold. The framework processes thousands of exposures and identifies two major exposures, namely DeepLogic Ltd and NeuralLinker SpA . Then, the framework performs a group-level assessment, and through structured data manipulation and reasoning tools, correctly determining that the ultimate controller, Synthetix Global Fund , breaches the regulatory threshold. The output includes a fully auditable trace, as the entire workflow is represented as a logical reasoning process. 

plex investigation. The challenge is not merely arithmetic. As shown in Figure 1, DeepLogic Ltd (16.375%) and Neu-ralLinker SpA (14.375%) appear as fully independent coun-terparties, each individually compliant with the 25% regula-tory limit. There is no a priori signal that they should be con-sidered together. Only by actively traversing their ownership chains does it emerge that both are ultimately controlled by 

Synthetix Global Fund , at which point aggregation reveals a combined exposure of 30.75%, constituting a clear breach. This ownership structure cannot be known in advance: it emerges only at runtime, as the investigation traverses cor-porate linkages among seemingly independent counterpar-ties. The objective is to determine whether multiple indi-vidually compliant exposures actually form an aggregated risk group and whether their interconnected risks collec-tively breach the regulatory threshold once aggregated. 

Limits of current approaches. Even if an LLM-based agent correctly identifies that a specific counterparty poses a concentration risk, the reasoning behind this decision would remain opaque. Which logic underlies the assessment? Were all types of credit considered appropriately? Was the poten-tial counterparty’s affiliation with a larger corporate group taken into account? Without an auditable trace, the analyst cannot verify the reasoning process or assess whether a cor-rect conclusion resulted from the right reasons. This opacity fundamentally undermines trust in high-stakes domains. Beyond explainability, scalability poses equally relevant is-sues. LLM context windows are finite, limiting the amount of data that can be processed. Empirical studies show that, as context length increases, models exhibit degraded atten-tion to information in the middle of the context (the so-called “lost in the middle ” phenomenon (Liu et al. 2024)), leading to overlooked details and compromised decisions. Even recent multi-agent paradigms, such as chain of agents (Zhang et al. 2024) and agent loops (Wu et al. 2024), where multiple specialized agents collaborate or iterate to handle long-horizon tasks, do not fully resolve all these is-sues. Indeed, individual agents still operate within finite context windows, inter-agent communication introduces co-ordination overhead and information loss, and the reasoning process remains distributed across opaque generative steps. In our concentration risk example, a realistic analysis may involve thousands of exposure records across multiple coun-terparties, each possibly requiring an investigation of corpo-rate group structures. Naively loading all the data into the context window is certainly infeasible. At the same time, defining retrieval criteria in advance is non-trivial, as overly restrictive filters risk omitting critical information. 

A hybrid solution. To effectively address these challenges, we propose V ADA ORCHESTRA , a neurosymbolic frame-work that leverages an LLM orchestrator for explicit, au-ditable, and dynamically adaptable decision-making work-flows. Given a complex user query (e.g., an assessment of a bank’s concentration risk) and a set of data sources, the system is required not only to produce an answer, but also to expose the verifiable reasoning steps that justify it. To this end, we model the workflow itself as a logical reasoning pro-cess. Specifically, we represent the entire process, includ-ing both structured and dynamic components, as an evolv-ing logic program in Vadalog (Bellomarini, Sallinger, and Gottlob 2018), a Datalog ± (Calì, Gottlob, and Lukasiewicz 2012) -based declarative language. In this program, predi-cates correspond to MCP tool invocations, rules encode de-pendencies among them, and inputs and outputs of the rules are the bindings of the predicates. In this way, every step of the workflow is captured in a logical trace, enabling full auditability and reproducibility of the reasoning process. The structured component of the process is guided by a de-pendency graph that encodes the logical relationships be-tween domain concepts, providing the deterministic back-bone required to orchestrate the reasoning process and en-force formal constraints. Once a high-level concept (e.g., bank’s exposures) is identified from the user’s query, the sys-tem consults the dependency graph to define an initial exe-cution plan. This ensures the execution order of MCP tools is enforced, rather than leaving it up to the LLM to infer. The dynamic component is managed by an LLM-based or-chestrator that adapts the workflow in response to intermedi-ate results. The reasoning flow is data-driven: the values of derived facts determine which tools are invoked next, their parameters, or whether the process should terminate. Fur-thermore, the orchestrator can synthesize Vadalog rules on the fly to perform data manipulations, such as joins and ag-gregations, that only become relevant at runtime. 

Benefits of the proposal. This hybrid approach provides three main benefits by blending the operational rigor of BPM systems with the adaptivity of Agentic AI. First, by rooting the workflow in a dependency graph, the system strictly ad-heres to domain-specific constraints. Unlike purely agentic approaches that may “hallucinate”, our framework enforces the deterministic behavior typical of logic-based systems, ensuring that high-stakes analyses (e.g., concentration risk) follow well-defined procedures. At the same time, adaptiv-ity is preserved: the LLM-based orchestrator manages plan-ning complexity by invoking tools, adapting the reasoning flow, and synthesizing logic operations on demand to handle contingencies that cannot be fully predefined. Second, representing the entire process, both the struc-tured and dynamic components, as a Vadalog logic program provides full transparency. The resulting logical trace makes every reasoning step explicit, enabling auditability and al-lowing analysts to verify not only the final outcome, but also the correctness of the reasoning that led to it. Moreover, by decoupling the orchestration and planning, handled by the LLM, from the actual data inference, executed by dedicated MCP tools, the framework ensures that the results are also reliable and reproducible for the analysts. Finally, this architecture addresses typical scalability lim-itations of traditional agentic systems, where performance often degrades as the volume of information increases. The orchestrator inspects the cardinality and statistical distribu-tion of the intermediate results to formulate fine-grained data querying strategies. Based on these high-level summaries, it selectively retrieves only the data subsets required for the next stage of planning. 

Contributions. In this paper, we present V ADA ORCHES -

> TRA

, a neurosymbolic framework that bridges BPM rigor with the adaptability of Agentic AI. The main contributions of this work are as follows: • We design a hybrid architecture that integrates logic-based reasoning with dynamic LLM-driven orchestra-tion to automate knowledge-intensive workflows. • We propose a methodology for the on-demand synthe-sis of process rules in Vadalog , enabling data manipula-tion over intermediate results that emerge at runtime. • We experimentally showcase the effectiveness of our ap-proach on a real-world financial use case , demonstrating its scalability and the faithfulness of its reasoning traces over standard agentic architectures. 

## 2 System Overview 

Knowledge-intensive workflows in domains such as finance require both adherence to structured procedures and the flex-ibility to adapt to intermediate findings. Figure 1 illus-trates our framework, V ADA ORCHESTRA . It automates such workflows through an LLM-based orchestrator for dynamic decision planning and a symbolic reasoning engine for logi-cal inference, providing adaptive yet auditable executions. Architecturally, the framework enforces a clear separation between planning and execution, thanks to a tight interac-tion between the LLM-orchestrator and a symbolic reasoner via MCP tools. The orchestrator is equipped with a set of tools, including reasoning tools (e.g., computing exposures) and support tools (e.g., navigating and manipulating inter-mediate data) whose composition is guided by a dependency graph to retrieve information and answer user queries. Areasoning tool is defined as a logic program in Vadalog, that is, a set of facts and rules encoding domain-specific infer-ence logic, with support for aggregations, arithmetic expres-sions, and negation. Further details regarding the Vadalog language are discussed in Section 3. 

2.1 A Financial Use Case 

We consider the scenario depicted in Figure 1, where the an-alyst of a Central Bank in Europe assesses whether a com-mercial bank complies with concentration risk limits. In banking regulation, an exposure represents the total credit risk a bank holds toward a counterparty, including loans, credit lines, and other commitments, which may pose sig-nificant risk when exceeding a regulatory threshold. In our example, the analyst may ask the following question: 

“What are Bank Gamma’s largest exposures, and do any of them raise concentration risk concerns?” 

This question highlights the adaptability of our framework to a complex workflow, which consists of an initial struc-tured phase — where exposures are computed according to predefined domain rules — and a subsequent dynamic phase 

driven by the actual findings. 

Structured Phase. The workflow starts when the LLM-based orchestrator receives the analyst’s question. It first discovers the available MCP tools and performs seman-tic matching between the query and the tool specifica-tions to identify the most appropriate ones to invoke. In this case, the question mentions “exposures” and “concen-tration risk concerns”, thus the LLM-orchestrator selects 

get_bank_exposures and get_bank_info , extracting the pa-rameters from the query (e.g., “Bank Gamma” ) to retrieve the bank’s capital and regulatory thresholds. Before executing any tools, the system invokes the support tool get_dependencies to identify inter-tool de-pendencies. High-level reasoning tools can in fact be expressed in terms of reusable lower-level tools, which must be executed in a meaningful order. For instance, get_bank_exposures(bank_name) depends on 

get_loans(bank_name) and get_credit_lines(bank_name) ,which provide the data required to compute the exposures. This step enables the orchestrator to consolidate the execu-tion plan (i.e., first block of Figure 2), which is then exe-cuted. For each execution of a reasoning tool , the V ADALOG 

engine (Bellomarini et al. 2022; Bellomarini et al. 2024) ex-ecutes the associated program and materializes the results in a persistent storage, allowing the LLM to navigate and manipulate them via support tools (see Step 4 of Figure 2) without saturating the context window. 

The structured phase returns two major exposures: Neu-ralLinker SpA (11.5M) and DeepLogic Ltd (13.1M), cor-responding to 14.375% and 16.375% of Bank Gamma’s capital, respectively. Both values are below the regulatory threshold of 25%. A traditional static BPM system would typically terminate at this point and report a compliant sta-tus together with the computed exposures. 

Dynamic Phase. In our framework, after each execution plan is carried out, the LLM orchestrator analyzes the actual findings to determine whether refinements are necessary, in an iterative process referred to as the replanning stage. In the running example, the orchestrator detects a seman-tic similarity between the profiles of NeuralLinker SpA and 

DeepLogic Ltd , suggesting a potential hidden relationship. Consequently, the system decides to plan a new execution, and investigate whether the two entities belong to the same corporate group. Guided by the dependency graph, the ex-ecution of the new plan (see the third block of Figure 2) reveals that both companies are controlled by the Synthetix Global Fund . The orchestrator therefore identifies the need for group-level aggregation, synthesizes a logical rule to ag-gregate the exposures and verify whether they collectively exceed the regulatory threshold (the last block of Figure 2). 

The dynamic phase highlights a concentration risk: while individual entities are compliant, the Synthetix Global Fund 

exposes an aggregation concentration risk, reaching 30 .75% 

of the bank’s capital. 

Execution and Logical Trace. This example illustrates a single cycle of structured and dynamic interaction, however, VADA ORCHESTRA supports multiple iterations and plans. Such analyses are often unreliable for RAG-based or purely agentic systems, which struggle to maintain coherence as the context window becomes cluttered. Most importantly, and in contrast to existing approaches, the system maintains a complete logical trace in the form of a Vadalog program recording every tool invocation and synthesized rule. This trace guarantees reproducibility: evaluating it over the orig-inal data yields identical results without LLM involvement. 

## 3 Preliminaries 

We first lay out some preliminary notions. 

Relational foundations. A ( relational ) schema S is a finite set of relation symbols (or predicates ) with associated arity. A term is either a constant or a variable. An atom over S is an expression of the form R(¯ v), where R ∈ S is of arity n > 

0 and ¯v is an n-tuple of terms. A database (instance ) over 

S associates to each symbol in S a relation of the respective arity over the domain of constants and nulls. 

Vadalog syntax. Vadalog is a declarative language for on-tological reasoning based on Warded Datalog ±, a member of the Datalog family that extends Datalog with existen-tial quantifiers while guaranteeing PTIME data complexity for query answering (Gottlob and Pieris 2015). A Warded Datalog ± program consists of a set of facts and rules (or 

tuple-generating dependencies , TGDs). A rule has the form: 

ψ(¯ x, ¯z) :- φ(¯ x, ¯y), where φ(¯ x, ¯y) (the body ) and ψ(¯ x, ¯z) (the 

head ) are conjunctions of atoms, ¯x, ¯y are universally quan-tified variables (quantifiers omitted), ¯z is a vector of exis-tentially quantified variables, and conjunction is denoted by comma. Vadalog extends the Warded fragment with features of practical utility. Support for aggregate functions ( sum ,

prod , min , max , count ) is achieved via monotonic aggrega-tions (Shkapsky, Yang, and Zaniolo 2015). Other extensions include stratified negation , negative constraints of the form 

⊥ :- φ(¯ x, ¯y) to model disjointness or non-membership, and 

expressions in rule bodies with comparison (>, <, ≥, ≤,̸ =) 

and algebraic (+ , −, ∗, / , etc.) operators. 

Reasoning and query answering. An ontological reason-ing task consists in answering a conjunctive query (CQ) Q

over a database D, augmented with a set Σ of rules. A CQ over a schema S has the form q(x):-ϕ(x, y), where ϕ(x, y)

is a conjunction of atoms and q(x) is a predicate not in S. A CQ Q is satisfied in D if there exists a homomorphism, i.e., a constant-preserving mapping h, from the atoms in ϕ(x, y)

to the facts in D. The semantics of a Vadalog program is defined operationally via the chase procedure (Johnson and Klug 1984; Beeri and Vardi 1984), which enforces the satis-faction of a set Σ of rules over D by incrementally deriving new facts until all rules are satisfied. 

## 4 VADAOrchestra: System Architecture 

This section presents the technical details of V ADA ORCHES -

> TRA

. Figure 1 illustrates the overall architecture, highlight-ing the main components and their interactions. We first de-scribe the system architecture and the MCP tools. Then, we detail the orchestration pipeline: dependency-aware plan-ning, plan execution, targeted data retrieval, on-demand data manipulation and replanning. Finally, we delve into the log-ical trace for explainability and full reproducibility. 

4.1 System Architecture 

VADA ORCHESTRA implements a strict separation between planning and execution through a client-server architecture mediated by MCP. This design ensures that the orchestrator handles high-level planning decisions and tools parameteri-zation delegating all data inference to the V ADALOG engine. The framework comprises two main components: • MCP Client (Orchestrator) : Coordinates the decision-making workflow by selecting tools, defining parameters, managing tool’s dependencies, performing plan refine-ments, and defining data manipulations on the fly. The or-chestrator serves as a coordination layer, without directly processing raw data. • MCP Server (Executor) : Exposes reasoning capabili-ties as MCP tools and executes all inferences through the VADALOG engine. The server is stateless with respect to orchestration logic, it responds to individual tool invoca-tions, and materializes results. The communication between client and server follows the MCP specification: the client issues tool calls with typed parameters, and the server returns structured responses con-taining the execution status, a preview of the derived facts and some metadata. The MCP server features four cate-gories of tools, each serving a distinct role in the pipeline. 

Reasoning Tools. Reasoning tools constitute the primary interface for symbolic inference. Each reasoning tool ti ∈TR is characterized by a tuple: 

ti = ⟨name , params , description , pred , schema , deps ⟩

where name identifies the tool, params specifies the required input parameters, and description explains the purpose of the tool. Additionally, schema defines the structure of derived facts, whereas deps specifies the upstream tools that must be executed as prerequisites. Finally, pred denotes the output predicate where data will be materialized. Reasoning tools execute Vadalog programs with bound parameters which en-capsulate domain-specific reasoning logic (e.g., how to com-pute exposures from loans and credit lines). 

Discovery Tools. Discovery tools enable the orchestrator to inspect the tool ecosystem and construct the dependency graph. The discovery tools are: • list_tools() : Returns the catalog of available reasoning tools with their descriptions, parameters, schemas, and output predicate. • get_dependencies( ti): For a given reasoning tool ti, re-turns the set of tools {t1, . . . , t k} whose output predicates are referenced in ti’s Vadalog program. 

Decision Support Tools. Decision support tools provide high-level summaries and targeted data subsets from in-termediate results, ensuring the orchestrator receives only the most relevant information, thus avoiding a full data ex-change between client and server that could saturate the or-chestrator’s context window: • get_cardinality( pred ): Returns the number of facts cur-rently materialized for predicate pred .• get_statistics( pred ,ai): Returns statistical summaries (min, max, mean, distribution) for a specific attribute ai.• get_top_k( pred ,k,ao,af ,at): Returns the top-k facts from 

pred ranked by attribute ao, with optional filtering by ex-act match on af and threshold conditions on at. This pro-vides the LLM with a concrete, representative sample of the derived knowledge. 

Data Manipulation Tool. In contrast to reasoning tools whose programs are pre-defined, the data manipulation tool accepts an arbitrary Vadalog program generated by the LLM at runtime. This allows the orchestrator to define new in-ference rules on-the-fly, performing joins, aggregations, and arithmetic operations over materialized predicates to address analytical requirements that emerge dynamically during the workflow. Generated rules undergo syntactic validation be-fore execution by the V ADALOG engine. 

4.2 Orchestration Pipeline 

The orchestration pipeline unfolds through a sequence of phases that progressively construct the logical trace. The high-level control flow is illustrated in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Orchestration Pipeline                                                                     

> Require: q(query), τ(cardinality_threshold)
> Ensure: ρ(response), L(trace) 1L ← ∅ ,D ← ∅ ,D′← ∅
> 2T ← TOOL DISCOVERY ()
> 3Tsel ←TOOL SELECTION (q, T)
> 4I ← DEFINE PARAMETERS (q, Tsel )
> 5Π←PLAN (I,T)
> 6repeat
> 7for each stage Si∈Πdo
> 8FSi←EXECUTE (Si)9L ← L ∪ TRACE (Si)10 D′← F Si
> 11 if |D ′|> τ then
> 12 D′←GET TOP K(D′)
> 13 D ← D ∪ D ′
> 14 end if
> 15 M ← SYNTHESIZE (D, q )
> 16 L ← L ∪ M
> 17 (Π ,end )←REPLAN (D, q, S)
> 18 end for
> 19 until ¬end
> 20 ρ←GENERATE ANS (D,L, q )
> 21 return (ρ, L)

1. Tool Discovery and Selection. The pipeline begins with the orchestrator retrieving the tool catalog T (line 2) via the discovery tool list_tools() . Given a user query q, tool se-lection produces a subset Tsel ⊆ T by prompting an LLM to identify tools whose descriptions are semantically rele-vant to q (line 3). Following selection, a parameterization phase extracts concrete values from the query to instanti-ate each tool’s required parameters. For instance, given the query “ What are Bank Gamma’s largest exposures? ” and the selected tool get_bank_exposure(bank_name) , the LLM extracts “Bank Gamma” as the binding for bank_name .Formally, a tool invocation is a pair i = ( tj , θ tj ) where 

tj ∈ T and θtj : params (tj ) → ∆ is the parameter binding, mapping each parameter to a constant from the domain ∆.The set of all tool invocations, denoted by I (line 4), consti-tutes the initial step in generating a tool execution plan. 

2. Dependency-Aware Planning. Before plan execution, the system constructs a dependency graph to identify inter-tool dependencies and ensure correct ordering. A depen-dency arises whenever a reasoning tool requires a predicate produced by another tool as a prerequisite. The dependency graph G = ( V, E ) is a directed acyclic graph (DAG) where: • nodes V correspond to tool output predicates. • edges E represent dependencies: an edge (pred i, pred j )

exists if pred i ∈ deps (pred j ), meaning the tool produc-ing pred i requires pred j as input. The graph is defined over tool output predicates rather than tool invocations, ensuring a compact dependency represen-tation regardless of how many times each tool is invoked. Graph construction consists in a topological sort of all the selected tools. We iterate over all selected tools I and in-voke get_dependencies( ti) for each. When a prerequisite tool t′ ∈ T is discovered that was not in the original selec-tion Tsel , it is added to the plan and its own dependencies are resolved recursively. Since the tool catalog T is finite and 

G is acyclic, this process is guaranteed to terminate. This mechanism guarantees that the orchestrator never omits re-quired computations, even when the LLM’s initial selection is incomplete. Tools explicitly selected by the LLM are des-ignated high-level ; those added through dependency resolu-tion are low-level . The distinction propagates to their output predicates. Only high-level predicates are surfaced in the fi-nal response to preserve conciseness, while low-level predi-cates serve as intermediate computations retained in the log-ical trace for auditability. 

3. Execution Plan Generation. Given the dependency graph G, the system generates an execution plan (line 5) that respects dependencies while maximizing parallelism. An execution plan Π = ⟨S0, S 1, . . . , S k⟩ is a sequence of stages, where each stage Si ⊆ I is a set of tool invocations 

⟨i0, i 1, . . . , i m⟩ that can be executed concurrently. A valid plan must satisfy the following properties: 1. completeness : Ski=0 Si = I. Every tool invocation must appear in exactly one stage. 2. disjointness : Si ∩ Sj = ∅ for i̸ = j. Each tool invocation is executed exactly once. 3. dependency ordering : for any tool invocations (t1, θ t1 ) ∈

Si and (t2, θ t2 ) ∈ Sj , if (pred (t1), pred (t2)) ∈ E, then 

j < i . Any tool that depends on the output of another must be scheduled in a subsequent stage. 4. predicate-safety : two invocations i1 and i2 of the same tool ti with different parameters must be placed in differ-ent stages ( Sj , S i with j̸ = i), as they write to the same output predicate. In our running example, the initial execution plan com-prises two stages. Stage S0 groups three independent tools 

⟨get_bank_info() , get_loans() , get_credit_lines() ⟩, all pa-rameterized with “Bank Gamma”, that execute concurrently. Stage S1 contains ⟨get_bank_exposures() ⟩, which depends on get_loans() , get_credit_lines() . Tools in S0 share no de-pendencies and execute concurrently; get_bank_exposures() 

depends on the predicates produced by get_loans() and 

get_credit_lines() , so it is scheduled in S1.

4. Iterative Plan Execution. The execution loop iter-ates over the stages of the current plan until the orches-trator determines that sufficient information has been gath-ered (lines 6–19). Each iteration comprises stage execution, smart data retrieval, optional data manipulation, and a re-planning decision. Crucially, the orchestrator never accesses full results: it operates exclusively on targeted data samples. For each stage in the plan, the executor processes all invo-cations within the stage and materializes the derived facts. Whenever an invocation completes, the orchestrator receives an execution status along with some metadata (result’s car-dinality, output predicate, schema). This information is then used in the data retrieval stage, influencing both the subse-quent data manipulation and the replanning phases. As each stage completes, the rules corresponding to tool invocations are recorded within the logical trace L (line 9). For instance, after S0, the trace records the first three rules of Figure 2. 

5. Targeted Data Retrieval. A central challenge in LLM-orchestrated decision-making is scalability: tools may pro-duce result sets with thousands or millions of facts, far ex-ceeding what can be injected into an LLM’s context window. Rather than applying fixed criteria, V ADA ORCHESTRA em-ploys an LLM-guided retrieval strategy that adapts to the data characteristics observed at runtime. After each stage execution, the orchestrator inspects the cardinality of the materialized predicates via the get_cardinality() tool. Pred-icates whose cardinality exceeds a configurable threshold τ

trigger the smart data retrieval procedure (line 11), the others are directly loaded into memory instead. 

Phase 1: Statistical Analysis. For each large predicate, the LLM inspects the predicate schema and cardinality, along with the user’s query, and decides which attributes require statistical analysis. The orchestrator then invokes 

get_statistics() for the selected attributes, obtaining distribu-tions, ranges, and aggregates without transferring raw data. 

Phase 2: Retrieval Strategy. The LLM receives the com-puted statistics and formulates a concrete retrieval strategy: which records to retrieve, by what criteria, and how many. This strategy is expressed as a sequence of get_top_k() in-vocations with specific ordering, filtering, and threshold pa-rameters grounded in the observed data distribution. This two-phase approach results in working with rep-resentative, query-relevant data avoiding the brittleness of fixed-k strategies and maintaining strict bounds on the amount of information within LLM’s context window. 

6. On-Demand Data Manipulation. Pre-registered reason-ing tools encapsulate domain-specific inference, but many analytical questions require combining results from multi-ple tools in ways that cannot be anticipated at design time. VADA ORCHESTRA addresses this through on-demand data manipulation: the LLM generates Vadalog rules at runtime that are executed by the symbolic engine, ensuring compu-tational correctness for joins, aggregations, and arithmetic while leveraging the LLM’s ability to understand the user’s intent and identify the relevant data relationships. If the LLM determines that a manipulation is needed, it produces one or more Vadalog rules specifying joins, ag-gregations, or arithmetic operations over the available predi-cates. Since these rules reference the output predicates pop-ulated by tool invocations, they naturally operate over the complete set of derived facts generated during the process. The generated rules undergo syntactic validation before be-ing dispatched to the V ADALOG engine via the data manip-ulation tool (line 15). The results are materialized and the data manipulation rule is registered in L (line 16). This design achieves a clear separation of responsibilities: the LLM provides semantic understanding (what to com-pute), while the V ADALOG engine provides computational guarantees (how to compute). Operations such as multi-way joins with arithmetic expressions and aggregations, which LLMs frequently approximate incorrectly when performed in-context, are instead executed symbolically with formal correctness guarantees. In our example, data manipulation occurs twice. First, the orchestrator synthesizes rules to de-terministically verify whether any individual counterparty exceeds the regulatory threshold (rules 4a–4b in Figure 2). Since no individual exposure exceeds the limit, the orches-trator proceeds with further investigation. After discovering that DeepLogic Ltd and NeuralLinker SpA share the same ultimate controller, it synthesises aggregation rules to assess group-level concentration risk (rules 9b–9d in Figure 2). 

7. Replanning Mechanism. After smart retrieval and op-tional data manipulation, the orchestrator evaluates whether additional tool invocations are needed to adequately answer the query. The LLM receives the data collected from the previous data querying stage, the tool catalog, the invocation history, and any pending invocations, and decides whether to introduce new tool invocations (line 17). When new invoca-tions are proposed, the system performs dependency check-ing for the newly added tools, potentially introducing fur-ther low-level dependencies. The new invocations are inte-grated into the execution plan through the same predicate-safety scheduling approach used during the initial plan gen-eration. The extended plan appends new stages to the exist-ing plan, and execution continues from the next stage. To ensure termination, the system limits the execution loop to a predefined maximum number of iterations and imposes a strict constraint against invoking the same tool with identical parameters twice. This prevents unbounded and unjustified replanning iterations, still providing the LLM with sufficient opportunities for data discovery and investigation. 

4.3 Logical Trace 

A distinguishing feature of V ADA ORCHESTRA is the track-ing of the reasoning process as a Vadalog program, where rules represent tool invocations and data manipulations. This trace provides a faithful, human-readable explanation of the decision-making process, and supports deterministic reproducibility without any LLM involved. 

Definition. A logical trace L = LI ∪ L M is a Vadalog program that evolves during execution. It consists of: • Invocation rules (LI ): For each needed tool invocation 

i = ( tj , θ tj ), a rule is generated whose structure directly mirrors the reasoning tool specification that we discussed in 4.1. The body contains a single atom name ( ¯X), where 

¯X = ( x1, . . . , x n, x n+1 , . . . , x n+m): x1, . . . , x n corre-spond to the input parameters of the tool, as grounded by the binding θtj , and xn+1 , . . . , x n+m are variables that will bind to the output actual parameters of the tool. The head is pred ( ¯Y ) with ¯Y ⊆ ¯X, projecting the relevant sub-set of variables. Formally: pred ( ¯Y ) ← name ( ¯X).• Manipulation rules (LM): Vadalog rules synthesized by the LLM during on-demand data manipulation, added di-rectly to the trace after syntactic validation and execution. A manipulation rule has the form: 

h( ¯Y , ¯Z) ← p1( ¯X1), . . . , p n( ¯Xn), C 1, . . . , C k.

where h is a new predicate, the variables projected within 

h are ¯Y ⊆ S 

> i

¯Xi, ¯Z are the variables appearing in as-signments in the rule body and C1, . . . , C k are either con-ditions (e.g., comparisons) over variables of the body or assignments (e.g., algebraic operations or aggregations) to variables of ¯Z. Unlike invocation rules, these rules are less constrained and may combine multiple predicates. 

Logical Trace Guarantees. The logical trace L is an or-dered sequence of invocation and manipulation rules that captures the complete execution plan: each rule records a reasoning step performed by the system, and the sequential ordering reflects the execution schedule determined by the orchestrator. Since every rule in LI is generated at the mo-ment of tool invocation and every rule in LM is tracked after invoking the V ADALOG engine, the trace faithfully records the actions the system actually performed and not a post-hoc reconstruction. This faithfulness directly entails repro-ducibility: L crystallizes any decision made by the LLM-orchestrator: which tools to invoke, with which parameters, in which order and which data manipulations to perform. Thereby, evaluating the trace against the same data sources allows us to re-execute exactly the same sequence of actions yielding identical derived facts without any LLM involve-ment, turning a sequence of LLM-based decisions into a de-terministic plan. The trace is also a human-readable expla-nation of the entire decision-making process, providing full auditability to domain analysts. Figure 2 shows the complete logical trace for the running example, illustrating the full se-quence of invocations and data manipulations that explains the reasoning process leading to the final conclusion. 

4.4 Answer Generation 

After all execution stages are complete, the orchestrator gen-erates the final answer through a hierarchical data injection strategy (line 20). Only high-level predicates—those pro-duced by tools selected by the LLM—are presented for an-swer synthesis. Low-level predicates, which served as in-termediate computations and were included as dependen-cies of selected tools, are excluded to avoid cluttering the context. When predicates from data manipulation exist, the LLM is instructed to rely on the computed results rather than re-deriving conclusions from raw data. This ensures that the precision of the V ADALOG engine’s computations guides the final answer, preventing the LLM from introducing errors through in-context reasoning. 

## 5 Experimental Evaluation 

In this section, we evaluate the performance and explainabil-ity of our framework against state-of-the-art solutions. 1

Question Answering Task. VADA ORCHESTRA addresses complex workflows formulated as Question Answering (QA) tasks, where a user query requires dynamic – yet for-mally grounded – iterative reasoning over a large knowledge base. We consider a QA dataset {qi, a i}i∈N in natural lan-guage over a knowledge base D, where each answer ai re-quires multiple operations (e.g., intersections and arithmetic aggregations) to resolve the question qi (see Figure 1). 

Metrics. We evaluate the accuracy of the framework by measuring the fraction of correctly answered questions us-ing two complementary metrics: (1) Exact Match (EM) , a case-insensitive string comparison between the predicted an-swer and the ground truth; and (2) LLM-as-a-Judge , where an independent LLM (Llama-3.3-70B) assesses whether the                                                                                           

> 1VADA ORCHESTRA codebase is available upon request. # Type Rule(s)
> 0LIbankInfo("Bank Gamma",TotCap,RegLim) :-get_bank_info("Bank Gamma",TotCap,RegLim).
> 1LIcreditLines("Bank Gamma",Borrower,CredLim,Amount) :-get_credit_lines("Bank Gamma",Borrower,CredLim,Amount).
> 2LIloans("Bank Gamma",Borrower,Amount,LoanType) :-get_loans("Bank Gamma",Borrower,Amount,LoanType).
> 3LIexposure("Bank Gamma",Borrower,TotExp) :-get_bank_exposures("Bank Gamma",Borrower,TotExp).
> 4a LMregLim(BankName,RegT) :-bankInfo(BankName,TotCap,RegLim), RegT =TotCap *RegLim.
> 4b LMexceedRegT(BankName,Borrower,TotExp) :-exposure(BankName,Borrower,TotExp), regLim(BankName,RegT), TotExp >RegT.
> 5LIshareholders(Shareholder,"NeuralLinker SpA",Ownership) :-get_shareholders(Shareholder,"NeuralLinker SpA",Ownership).
> 6LIultimateCtrl(Controller,"NeuralLinker SpA") :-get_ultimate_controller(Controller,"NeuralLinker SpA").
> 7LIshareholders(Shareholder,"DeepLogic Ltd",Ownership) :-get_shareholders(Shareholder,"DeepLogic Ltd",Ownership).
> 8LIultimateCtrl(Controller,"DeepLogic Ltd") :-get_ultimate_controller(Controller,"DeepLogic Ltd").
> 9a LM(rules 4a–4b repeated)
> 9b LMctrlExp(Controller,TotExp) :-exposure(BankName,Borrower,TotExp), ultimateCtrl(Controller,Borrower).
> 9c LMtotByCtrl(Controller,GroupExp) :-ctrlExp(Controller,TotExp), GroupExp =sum(TotExp).
> 9d LMconcRisk(Controller,GroupExp) :-totByCtrl(Controller,GroupExp), regLim("Bank Gamma",RegT), GroupExp >RegT.

Figure 2: Complete logical trace L for the running example. Steps 0–3: structured phase. Step 4: first threshold check. Steps 5–8: dynamic-phase. Steps 9: group-level concentration risk assessment. Repeated manipulation rules are marked as such. 

predicted answer is correct and complete with respect to the ground truth, thereby avoiding penalization of semantically equivalent answers that differ only in surface form. 

Models and Datasets. We evaluate our framework against four state-of-the-art agentic solutions commonly used for complex QA workflows, capturing different capabilities such as flexibility, scalability, and factual correctness: (i) 

LLM , where an LLM model answers questions using only its parametric knowledge, without access to external data; (ii) ReFactX (Pozzi et al. 2025), a constrained-generation approach that constructs a prefix tree over verbalized knowl-edge graph triples and restricts decoding to only valid fact sequences; (iii) LLM+RAG , a Retrieval-Augmented Gen-eration (RAG) system in which a retriever selects relevant data from the knowledge base and injects them into the LLM context; and (iv) LLM+MCP , an agentic approach where the LLM is equipped with the same reasoning tools of V ADA ORCHESTRA , exposed via MCP, but autonomously decides which tools to invoke without explicit dependency aware (re)planning or the ability to synthesize data manipu-lations on the fly, as seen in V ADA ORCHESTRA .Given the complexity of the workflows under evaluation, we focus on two anonymized QA datasets derived from a large European central bank knowledge graph containing approximately 10k triples and nine relations: (1) the Bank 

dataset consists of 278 template-based questions (including generic, count and multi-hop QAs) introduced in ReFactX ;(2) the B ANK + an augmented version for scalability stress test, where count queries require from a few up to 1,000 different KG entities. This setup enables fine-grained be-havioral analysis and scalability evaluation as more rela-tional evidence is needed to derive correct answers. Finally, since all approaches rely on LLMs, we assess their robust-ness under two operational regimes: an open-weight model (Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct) and a state-of-the-art proprietary model (GPT-4o) accessed via API. 

5.1 Results and Discussion 

Quantitative Analysis. Figure 3 reports the accuracy of all approaches on the Bank dataset, with two different under-lying LLM models. As expected, the LLM-only baseline achieves around 0.18 EM and 0.23 LLM-as-a-Judge accu-racy, as the anonymized financial data lies largely outside the model’s parametric knowledge, highlighting the need for external knowledge retrieval. In fact, knowledge-enhanced approaches yield substantial performance gains. For exam-ple, ReFactX raises accuracy to 0.36 (EM) and 0.43 (LLM-as-a-Judge), which represents a meaningful gain over the LLM-only, however, it falls short of the RAG and agen-tic approaches. This is because ReFactX primarily serves to constrain the model’s output to valid factual sequences, whereas LLM+RAG and LLM+MCP equip the model with an “external memory” and the agency to query it dynami-cally. LLM+RAG , which retrieves and injects relevant pas-sages, reaches 0.39 EM and 0.60 LLM-as-a-Judge with Llama, and 0.42 EM / 0.60 LLM-as-a-Judge with GPT-4o— indicating that the benefit of retrieval is relatively stable across models. RAG is particularly relevant in our experi-ments, as it represents the most established technique to mit-igate context-window limitations. Nevertheless, injecting relevant passages does not address the inability of LLMs to perform reliable data-driven reasoning over large evidence sets. Both LLM+MCP and V ADA ORCHESTRA substantially outperform traditional retrieval-based methods thanks to the available tools; however, their relative effectiveness varies with the capability of the underlying LLM model. With a Llama backbone, LLM+MCP achieves slightly higher per-formance than V ADA ORCHESTRA (0.58 EM compared to 0.50), mainly due to errors in the synthesis of Vadalog rules, a core component of V ADA ORCHESTRA . Rule generation is a complex task that smaller models often handle imper-fectly, producing rules that are syntactically correct but se-mantically flawed, thereby reducing final answer accuracy. However, using the more capable GPT-4o backbone, VADA ORCHESTRA reaches 0.65 EM and 0.78 Judge accu-racy, surpassing the 0.63 EM and 0.77 Judge obtained by 

LLM+MCP . This indicates that V ADA ORCHESTRA better leverages stronger models to answer complex queries. Over-all, the results confirm that tool-based solutions overcome single-pass retrieval and constrained-generation methods. 

Scalability Analysis. To assess how robustly each approach handles questions of increasing complexity, we evaluate the 0             

> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1
> LLM_only ReFactX LLM+RAG LLM+MCP VADAOrchestra
> Llama 70B 3.3
> Accuracy
> 0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1
> LLM+RAG LLM+MCP VADAOrchestra
> GPT-4o Exact Match LLM-as-a-Judge
> Accuracy LLM+MCP VADAOrchestra
> Llama 70B 3.3
> 0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1
> LLM+RAG LLM+MCP VADAOrchestra
> GPT-4o Exact Match LLM-as-a-Judge
> Accuracy

Figure 3: Results for Llama and GPT-4o across approaches. 0                                                               

> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1
> 1510 25 50 100 200 300 500 750 1000
> GPT-4o
> Exact  Match  Rate
> Complexity threshold (queries with ≤Xentity-relations)
> 0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1
> 1510 25 50 100 200 300 500 750 1000
> GPT-4o
> VADAOrchestra MCP RAG top-10 RAG top-100 RAG top-1000
> LLM  Judge  Avg  Score
> Complexity threshold (queries with ≤Xentity-relations) 00 200 300 500 750 1000
> ies with ≤Xentity-relations)
> 0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1
> 1510 25 50 100 200 300 500 750 1000
> GPT-4o
> VADAOrchestra MCP RAG top-10 RAG top-100 RAG top-1000
> LLM  Judge  Avg  Score
> Complexity threshold (queries with ≤Xentity-relations)

Figure 4: Cumulative accuracy plotted against query complexity. 

three best-performing approaches on the augmented B ANK +

dataset, explicitly designed to stress-test scalability, where complexity is defined by the total number of entity-relations required to compute the final answer. Figure 4 reports the cumulative EM rate and LLM-Judge score for all queries whose complexity does not exceed a specific threshold, plot-ted for thresholds ranging from 1 to 1,000 entity-relations. This cumulative view shows how including progressively harder questions affects overall system performance. For 

LLM+RAG , we consider three configurations, top-10, top-100, and top-1,000 records retrieved, to disentangle whether retrieval depth compensates for increasing complexity. In the low-complexity regime , the results confirm those of the quantitative analysis, with V ADA ORCHESTRA achiev-ing the best performance, followed by the LLM+MCP and the RAG-based solutions. Notably, the LLM-as-a-Judge 

Exposures Controllers Risk Trace LLM+RAG All found None ✗ ✗

LLM+MCP All found Identified ∼ ✗

VADA ORCHESTRA All found Identified ✓ ✓

System conclusions: LLM+RAG : “Neither poses concentration risk.” 

LLM+MCP : “Ultimate controller could imply a concentration risk if exposures are considered collectively.” 

VADA ORCHESTRA : “Combined exposure $24.6M exceeds 25% regulatory threshold. This indicates a concentration risk due to the common ultimate controller: Synthetix Global Fund.” 

Figure 5: Running example answer comparison across approaches. 

metric yields a score close to 0.8 for V ADA ORCHESTRA ,which was slightly penalized by the EM metric. In the high-complexity regime , we instead observe a clear advantage for V ADA ORCHESTRA , which maintains stable and satisfactory performance. For example, consid-ering EM at threshold X = 50 , the RAG-based approaches performance drops to around 0.35, revealing structural lim-itations of retrieval constrained by the context window. No-tably, this degradation persists even when retrieval depth is progressively increased from top-10 to top-1000, confirming that enlarging the retrieved context does not compensate the limited reasoning capacity of LLMs. This is consistent with the observation that operations such as counting or verifying a property over an entire table will eventually saturate the context: while RAG can help identify the relevant records, it does not address the underlying inability of LLMs to per-form such operations reliably (Barnett et al. 2024). Similarly, LLM+MCP declines significantly, from ap-proximately 0.7 to about 0.55, demonstrating that delegating all reasoning and aggregation steps to the LLM may degrade performance in complex workflows. In most cases, these so-lutions produce substantially incorrect answers, drastically lowering the cumulative score despite good performance in simpler regime. By contrast, V ADA ORCHESTRA remains stable, with not less than 0.63 of EM and 0.8 LLM-as-Judge accuracy. This confirms that its scalability advantage is ar-chitectural rather than incidental, as data manipulation and logical reasoning are handled by the symbolic engine. 

Auditability of Answers. To illustrate how the approaches differ in terms of explainability , we revisit the running example introduced in Section 2, with Figure 5 summa-rizing the answers produced by LLM+RAG , LLM+MCP ,and V ADA ORCHESTRA . Answering the running example’s question requires three main phases: (i) retrieving all of Bank Gamma’s exposures, (ii) identifying the ultimate con-trollers behind each borrower, and (iii) aggregating expo-sures that share a common controller to check whether their sum exceeds the 25% regulatory threshold. We observe that LLM+RAG never examines the owner-ship structure of the borrowers and therefore incorrectly concludes that no concentration risk exists. The failure is structural: a single retrieval pass does not extend the analysis to ultimate controller relationships. LLM+MCP correctly identifies the exposures and, through tool invoca-tions, discovers that both DeepLogic Ltd and NeuralLinker SpA are ultimately controlled by Synthetix Global Fund ,suggesting potential concentration risk. However, it remains limited by its LLM-driven nature, failing to reliably perform the aggregation and threshold check required for accurate risk assessment. Finally, only V ADA ORCHESTRA produces the correct answer. After identifying all exposures and discovering the ultimate controllers via dedicated tool invo-cations, it delegates the aggregation and threshold check to the V ADALOG engine: the total exposure of $24.6M under 

Synthetix Global Fund is computed deterministically and flagged as exceeding the regulatory limit. Beyond correctness, the distinguishing feature of VADA ORCHESTRA is the logical trace it produces, shown in Figure 2. The analyst can therefore interpret the final answer back through each intermediate step, a property that is indispensable in regulated financial settings. 

Limitations in Real-World Financial Use Cases. We eval-uated V ADA ORCHESTRA across a wide range of financial use cases—including company ownership and concentration risk assessment—without encountering major shortcomings in terms of accuracy. We nonetheless identified two main limitations that are worth discussing. First, when the system processes entities that, at runtime, turn out to have many re-lationships relevant to the question, we observe an increase in token generation due to the multiple LLM invocations. Consequently, the overall execution time of V ADA ORCHES - 

> TRA

grows with respect to a traditional agentic approach, since rule synthesis introduces further overhead. We con-sider this an acceptable trade-off in light of the gains in cor-rectness and scalability. Second, the quality of the gener-ated data manipulation rules can degrade in complex finan-cial scenarios, when smaller language models are used as the backbone (see Figure 3). In future work, we plan to ex-tend the system with additional validation mechanisms to improve the quality of the generated rules, thereby enhanc-ing the performance of small language models. 

## 6 Conclusion 

This paper introduces V ADA ORCHESTRA , a novel neu-rosymbolic framework for automating knowledge-intensive workflows that require both adherence to structured domain procedures and flexibility to adapt to runtime findings. In particular, V ADA ORCHESTRA combines an LLM-driven or-chestration with symbolic reasoning: every tool invocation and data manipulation is encoded as a logical rule, repre-senting the entire decision-making process as an evolving logical program that provides a faithful, explainable, and re-producible execution trace. Experimental results on a real-world financial dataset demonstrate strong accuracy and au-ditability compared to purely agentic baselines. Future work will focus on integrating validation mechanisms to enhance the quality of synthesized rules, with a specific emphasis on improving the performance of small language models. 

## Acknowledgments 

This research was kindly supported in whole or in part by the Vienna Science and Technology Fund (WWTF), grant num-bers: 10.47379/VRG18013, 10.47379/ICT25032, 10.47379/ NXT22018, 10.47379/ICT2201, 10.47379/DCDH001 as well as by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) under grant number 10.55776/COE12. 

## AI Declaration 

The authors have not employed any Generative AI tools. 

## References 

Anthropic. 2024. Model context protocol (mcp). https: //modelcontextprotocol.io. Accessed: 2026-01-27. Barnett, S.; Kurniawan, S.; Thudumu, S.; Brannelly, Z.; and Abdelrazek, M. 2024. Seven failure points when engineer-ing a retrieval augmented generation system. In Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 3rd International Conference on AI Engi-neering - Software Engineering for AI , CAIN ’24, 194–199. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machin-ery. Beeri, C., and Vardi, M. Y. 1984. A proof procedure for data dependencies. Journal of the ACM (JACM) 31(4):718–741. Bellomarini, L.; Benedetto, D.; Gottlob, G.; and Sallinger, E. 2022. Vadalog: A modern architecture for automated rea-soning with large knowledge graphs. Inf. Syst. 105:101528. Bellomarini, L.; Benedetto, D.; Brandetti, M.; Sallinger, E.; and Vlad, A. 2024. The vadalog parallel system: Distributed reasoning with datalog+/-. Proceedings of the VLDB En-dowment 17(13):4614–4626. Bellomarini, L.; Sallinger, E.; and Gottlob, G. 2018. The vadalog system: Datalog-based reasoning for knowledge graphs. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 11(9). Calì, A.; Gottlob, G.; and Lukasiewicz, T. 2012. A general datalog-based framework for tractable query answering over ontologies. J. Web Semant. 14:57–83. Di Ciccio, C.; Marrella, A.; and Russo, A. 2015. Knowledge-intensive processes: Characteristics, require-ments and analysis of contemporary approaches. Journal on Data Semantics 4(1):29–57. Gottlob, G., and Pieris, A. 2015. Beyond sparql under owl 2 ql entailment regime: Rules to the rescue. In Twenty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence .Johnson, D. S., and Klug, A. C. 1984. Testing contain-ment of conjunctive queries under functional and inclusion dependencies. J. Comput. Syst. Sci. 28(1):167–189. Lanham, T.; Chen, A.; Radhakrishnan, A.; Steiner, B.; Deni-son, C. E.; Hernandez, D.; Li, D.; Durmus, E.; Hubinger, E.; Kernion, J.; Lukovsiut.e, K.; Nguyen, K.; Cheng, N.; Joseph, N.; Schiefer, N.; Rausch, O.; Larson, R.; McCan-dlish, S.; Kundu, S.; Kadavath, S.; Yang, S.; Henighan, T. J.; Maxwell, T. D.; Telleen-Lawton, T.; Hume, T.; Hatfield-Dodds, Z.; Kaplan, J.; Brauner, J.; Bowman, S.; and Perez, E. 2023. Measuring faithfulness in chain-of-thought reason-ing. ArXiv abs/2307.13702. Liu, N. F.; Lin, K.; Hewitt, J.; Paranjape, A.; Bevilacqua, M.; Petroni, F.; and Liang, P. 2024. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 12:157–173. Matton, K.; Ness, R. O.; Guttag, J. V.; and Kiciman, E. 2025. Walk the talk? measuring the faithfulness of large lan-guage model explanations. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Sin-gapore, April 24-28, 2025 . OpenReview.net. Patil, S. G.; Zhang, T.; Wang, X.; and Gonzalez, J. E. 2024. Gorilla: large language model connected with massive apis. In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’24. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc. Pozzi, R.; Palmonari, M.; Coletta, A.; Bellomarini, L.; Lehmann, J.; and Vahdati, S. 2025. Refactx: Scalable rea-soning with reliable facts via constrained generation. In The Semantic Web – ISWC 2025: 24th International Semantic Web Conference, Nara, Japan, November 2–6, 2025, Pro-ceedings, Part I , 290–308. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. Shinn, N.; Cassano, F.; Gopinath, A.; Narasimhan, K.; and Yao, S. 2023. Reflexion: language agents with verbal re-inforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 37th Interna-tional Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , NIPS ’23. Red Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc. Shkapsky, A.; Yang, M.; and Zaniolo, C. 2015. Optimiz-ing recursive queries with monotonic aggregates in deals. In 2015 IEEE 31st International Conference on Data Engi-neering , 867–878. IEEE. Tanneru, S. H.; Ley, D.; Agarwal, C.; and Lakkaraju, H. 2024. On the hardness of faithful chain-of-thought reasoning in large language models. ArXiv abs/2406.10625. Turpin, M.; Michael, J.; Perez, E.; and Bowman, S. R. 2023. Language models don’t always say what they think: Unfaithful explanations in chain-of-thought prompting. In 

Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Process-ing Systems .Wei, T.; Li, T.-W.; Liu, Z.; Ning, X.; Yang, Z.; Zou, J.; Zeng, Z.; Qiu, R.; Lin, X.; Fu, D.; Li, Z.; Ai, M.; Zhou, D.; Bao, W.; Li, Y.; Li, G.; Qian, C.; Wang, Y.; Tang, X.; Xiao, Y.; Fang, L.; Liu, H.; Tang, X.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, C.; You, J.; Ji, H.; Tong, H.; and He, J. 2026. Agentic reasoning for large language models. Wu, Q.; Bansal, G.; Zhang, J.; Wu, Y.; Li, B.; Zhu, E.; Jiang, L.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, S.; Liu, J.; Awadallah, A. H.; White, R. W.; Burger, D.; and Wang, C. 2024. Autogen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via multi-agent conversations. In First Conference on Language Modeling .Zhang, Y.; Sun, R.; Chen, Y.; Pfister, T.; Zhang, R.; and Arik, S. O. 2024. Chain of agents: Large language mod-els collaborating on long-context tasks. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-tems .